---
paper_id: 2212.06254
source: arxiv
title: You Only Need a Good Embeddings Extractor to Fix Spurious Correlations
converted_at: 2026-03-19T21:48:09.112340
note: "Content extracted before References section"
---

You Only Need a Good Embeddings Extractor
to Fix Spurious Correlations

Raghav Mehta V´ıtor Albiero

Ivan Evtimov Tamar Glaser

Li Chen
Zhiheng Li Tal Hassner

2
2
0
2
c
e
D
2
1

]

V
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
5
2
6
0
.
2
1
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Meta AI

Abstract. Spurious correlations in training data often lead to robust-
ness issues since models learn to use them as shortcuts. For example,
when predicting whether an object is a cow, a model might learn to rely
on its green background, so it would do poorly on a cow on a sandy
background A standard dataset for measuring state-of-the-art on meth-
ods mitigating this problem is Waterbirds. The best method (Group
Distributionally Robust Optimization - GroupDRO) currently achieves
89% worst group accuracy and standard training from scratch on raw
images only gets 72%. GroupDRO requires training a model in an end-
to-end manner with subgroup labels. In this paper, we show that we
can achieve up to 90% accuracy without using any sub-group informa-
tion in the training set by simply using embeddings from a large pre-
trained vision model extractor and training a linear classifier on top of
it. With experiments on a wide range of pre-trained models and pre-
training datasets, we show that the capacity of the pre-training model
and the size of the pre-training dataset matters. Our experiments reveal
that high capacity vision transformers perform better compared to high
capacity convolutional neural networks, and larger pre-training dataset
leads to better worst-group accuracy on the spurious correlation dataset.

Keywords: Spurious Correlation, Debiasing, Embeddings, SWAG

1

Introduction

Many machine learning models may rely on spurious correlation prevalent in
the training dataset for learning classification boundaries [1,7]. When spurious
correlations are not present in real world (validation or testing) datasets, model
performance is severely degraded [2,3]. Most methods considered in the litera-
ture so far mitigate this robustness gap by using explicit or inferred labels of
spuriously correlated subsets in the training data. Here, we observe that training
simple linear classifiers on embeddings extracted from frozen, large pre-trained
networks might be enough to mitigate spurious correlations.

To study this phenomenon, we worked with Waterbirds dataset [16], one of
the common benchmarks for tracking state of the art on mitigation of spurious
correlations. The task is to classify whether an image shows a waterbird or a
landbird. In this dataset, each bird is labeled as one of waterbird or landbird

2

Mehta et al.

and is placed on one of water background (BG) or land background. In the
training dataset, the majority (95%) of waterbirds are placed on a water back-
ground, while the majority (95%) of landbirds are placed on a land background.
This leads to background being spuriously correlated with actual class labels.
Training a classifier with Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) [20] loss on the
training dataset could lead to a biased classifier that performs poorly on minor-
ity groups (waterbirds on land background and landbirds on water background)
at test time. Instead of learning the actual classification between waterbirds or
landbirds, the classifier relies on spurious correlation of background with actual
labels. A good classifier should perform well on minority groups without rely-
ing on the spurious correlations. This is tracked by measuring the “worst-group
accuracy” (WGA) across the majority and the minority groups in the test data.

Most methods in the literature use explicit or inferred labels of the majority
and minority groups in the training data to achieve high WGA. GroupDRO [16]
minimizes the maximum loss across different groups in the training dataset.
Just Train Twice (JTT) [12] trains a model for a small amount of epochs, up-
weights the samples where this model made mistakes, and trains another model
using these up-weighted samples. Subsampling large Groups (SUBG) [9] trains
a model with data balanced set across different groups by subsampling images
from the majority classes to match the frequency of the minority class. Deep
Feature Reweighting DFR [11] trains a model with ERM loss, and following
that, replaces the classifier with another classifier which is trained with a group-
balanced dataset, similar to SUBG [9]. Other methods include Invariant Risk
Minimization (IRM) [2], Learning from Failure (LfF) [13], Environment Infer-
ence for Invariant Learning (EIIL) [4], and Entangling and Disentangling (EnD)
Deep Representations for Bias Correction [19].

Critically, in all of the above cases, subset labels are either given explicitly
in the training data or inferred during the model design and training . However,
this approach has several limitations. First, explicit labels are often not available
in real-world scenarios due to privacy concerns, and instances could be part of
multiple sub-groups, if different cues are present in a single instance. Second,
using even inferred labels for the subgroup may not be accurate, and can be
problematic if they are sensitive. Therefore, we believe information about the
subgroups should be used only for validation and testing and not for training.

Some recent studies [17,10] show that good pre-training and better architec-
tures can be useful for domain generalization [10] and distribution shifts [10]. In
this work, we observe that pre-training also helps with mitigating model short-
cuts due to spurious correlations in the training data. All of the limitations of
using subgroup labels may be overcome by not using them and instead relying
on embeddings from large, pre-trained feature-extracting networks. In our ex-
periments on Waterbirds, we achieve state-of-the-art WGA simply by freezing
the feature extractor and training simple linear classifiers on the embeddings
extracted from it.

You only need a good embeddings extractor to fix spurious correlations

3

Fig. 1: Overview of our proposed method. We use frozen pre-trained models as
embedding extractors and only train a linear classifier layer on top of these
embeddings with a standard Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) loss.

2 Experimental Setup and Dataset

We experiment with two convolutional neural network architectures, specifically
ResNets [8] and RegNetYs [15], as well as Visual Transformers (ViT) [6]. We use
models with different capacity across these networks which leads to a total of 18
networks. These networks are pre-trained with either ImageNet [5] or recently
proposed Supervised Weakly through hashtAGs (SWAG) dataset [18]. For all
networks, we use publicly available model weights1.

We extract embeddings from the above mentioned models without fine-tuning
them on the downstream dataset. We only train a linear classifier on extracted
embeddings. For all experiments, we grid search for three different learning rates
(LR) - 0.01, 0.001, 0.0001, and three different weight decays (WD) - 0.0001,
0.00001, 0.000001. We perform all experiments three times with three different
random seeds (0, 100, 200) and average their results. We train all models for 20
epochs with a batch size of 32. We measure the performance with overall accuracy
and worst-group accuracy. We choose models with the best WGA across the grid
searched values of LR and WD.

Waterbirds [16] is a popular benchmarking dataset used for measuring the
effect of debiasing spurious correlations. It combines bird photographs from the
Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-2011 (CUB) dataset [21] with image backgrounds from
the Places dataset [22]. In this dataset, the task is to classify birds as waterbirds
or landbirds. The training set contains a total 4,795 image divided into 4 groups:
(G1) Waterbirds on water BG - 3,498 images, (G2) Waterbirds on land BG -
184 images, (G3) Landbirds on water BG - 56 images, and (G4) Landbirds on
land BG - 1,057 images. G1 and G4 are majority groups, while G2 and G3
are minority groups. The validation and the test set are more balanced across

1 https://pytorch.org/vision/stable/models.html

4

Mehta et al.

Fig. 2: Plot depicting Worst Group Accuracy vs Overall Accuracy (accuracy
acorss all images in the dataset) of a linear classifier trained on embeddings
extracted from different models (ResNets - •, RegNets - ▲, and ViTs - ⋆) pre-
trained with different datasets (ImageNet, SWAG, and SWAG followed by E2E
ImageNet fine-tuning). Size of a symbol represents the capacity of a model. We
observe that embeddings extracted from higher capacity networks pretrained
on larger datasets perform better. We also show multiple state-of-the-art spuri-
ous debiasing methods like GroupDRO [16], JTT [12], SSA [14], LfF [13], and
EIIL [4]. All these methods train a ResNet-50 ImageNet pretrained model in
E2E manner on Waterbirds dataset. We also report ERM results for the same.
These results are taken from [14].

80.082.585.087.590.092.595.097.5Overall Accuracy (%)6065707580859095Worst Group Accuracy (%)Group-Imbalanced Training Sety=x lineResNets: ImageNet PretrainedRegNets: ImageNet PretrainedViTs: ImageNet PretrainedRegNets: SWAG PretrainedViTs: SWAG PretrainedRegNets: SWAG Pretrained + ImageNet FinetunedViTs: SWAG Pretrained + ImageNet FinetunedERM: ImageNet Pretrained ResNet-50JTT: ImageNet Pretrained ResNet-50GroupDRO: ImageNet Pretrained ResNet-50SSA: ImageNet Pretrained ResNet-50LfF: ImageNet Pretrained ResNet-50EIIL: ImageNet Pretrained ResNet-50You only need a good embeddings extractor to fix spurious correlations

5

groups. Validation set contains a total 1,199 images (G1 - 467 images, G2 - 467
images, G3 - 133 images, G4 - 133 images), while the test set contains a total
5794 images (G1 - 2,255 images, G2 - 2,255 images, G3 - 642 images, G4 - 642
images).

3 Experiments and Results

Effect of embedding extractor model size. In Fig. 2, we compare different
model architectures pre-trained using same datasets. In particular, we compare
5 different ResNets (•), 8 different RegNetYs (▲), and 4 different ViTs (⋆). Our
experiments show that for each group of networks trained on ImageNet, generally
higher capacity networks perform marginally better compared to lower capac-
ity networks. For networks trained on SWAG, we see rather profound effect of
model capacity as higher capacity RegNetYs (▲) and ViTs (⋆) perform better
compared to their ImageNet trained counterparts. We observe similar trend for
networks trained on SWAG followed by E2E ImageNet fine-tuning.

Pre-training dataset effect on performance. From Fig. 2 , we can also com-
pare performance of RegNetY (▲) and ViT (⋆) networks which are pre-trained
on different datasets. Specifically, we observe that RegNetY networks (▲) and
ViT networks (⋆) perform better at WGA and OA when pre-trained on SWAG
followed by E2E ImageNet fine-tuning. The performance is better compared to
networks that are only trained on SWAG or ImageNet. We can also observe that
network performance becomes closer to the y=x line, which shows that the ac-
curacy difference between overall accuracy and worst group accuracy is reduced.

Comparison to the state-of-the-art methods. The maximum WGA re-
ported in the literature [16] for the Waterbirds dataset is 89.2%. To achieve this
accuracy the authors required group labels and fine-tuned a model end-to-end.
In our experiments, we can achieve higher WGA (90.13% - ⋆) than this by only
training a linear classifier on embeddings extracted from a ViT-H-14 network
pre-trained on SWAG and followed by E2E finetuning on ImageNet without
performing any E2E training on the waterbirds dataset or needing group labels
during the training.

4 Conclusion

In this paper, we evaluated the debiasing effect of embeddings extracted from
networks with different capacity that are pretrained using different sizes of
dataset. We trained a simple linear classifier on top these embeddings. Our
experiments reveal that embeddings extracted from a high capacity network,
pre-trained using a large dataset has the lower amount of difference between its
worst group accuracy and overall accuracy.

6

Mehta et al.