---
paper_id: 2404.18870
source: arxiv
title: More RLHF, More Trust? On The Impact of Preference Alignment On Trustworthiness
converted_at: 2026-03-17T00:19:56.712043
note: "Content extracted before References section"
---

4
2
0
2
c
e
D
1
2

]
L
C
.
s
c
[

2
v
0
7
8
8
1
.
4
0
4
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

More RLHF, More Trust? On The Impact of Preference
Alignment On Trustworthiness

Aaron J. Li∗1, Satyapriya Krishna1, and Himabindu Lakkaraju1

1Harvard University

Abstract

The trustworthiness of Large Language Models (LLMs) refers to the extent to which their
outputs are reliable, safe, and ethically aligned, and it has become a crucial consideration
alongside their cognitive performance. In practice, Reinforcement Learning From Human
Feedback (RLHF) has been widely used to align LLMs with labeled human preferences,
but its assumed effect on model trustworthiness hasn’t been rigorously evaluated. To
bridge this knowledge gap, this study investigates how models aligned with general-purpose
preference data perform across five trustworthiness verticals: toxicity, stereotypical bias,
machine ethics, truthfulness, and privacy. Our results demonstrate that RLHF on human
preferences doesn’t automatically guarantee trustworthiness, and reverse effects are often
observed. Furthermore, we propose to adapt efficient influence function based data attribution
methods to the RLHF setting to better understand the influence of fine-tuning data on
individual trustworthiness benchmarks, and show its feasibility by providing our estimated
attribution scores. Together, our results underscore the need for more nuanced approaches
for model alignment from both the data and framework perspectives, and we hope this
research will guide the community towards developing language models that are increasingly
capable without sacrificing trustworthiness. The code for our experiments is available at
https://github.com/AI4LIFE-GROUP/RLHF_Trust.

1.

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have recently emerged as a groundbreaking advancement in
artificial intelligence, demonstrating state-of-the-art performance across a wide range of cognitive
tasks [1, 2, 3, 4]. As these models grow in size and capability, ensuring their alignment with
human preferences becomes increasingly critical [5]. The success of models like ChatGPT can be
largely attributed to the application of model alignment methods, particularly Reinforcement
Learning From Human Feedback (RLHF) [6, 7].

Trustworthiness is a critical attribute for AI systems to ensure responsible and safe interactions
with users, and it encompasses a model’s adherence to a broad spectrum of human values, including
the reduction of toxic outputs [8], minimization of bias [9], and preservation of privacy [10], as
proposed by Wang et al. [11] and Sun et al. [12]. Despite the widespread adoption of preference
learning frameworks to enhance model alignment, their impact on crucial aspects of model
trustworthiness remains largely unexplored, as many of them are not primary selection criteria
when curating large general-purpose preference datasets for RLHF in practice. Consequently,
while popular RLHF algorithms have demonstrated success in enhancing model alignment with
provided human feedback, as seen in some of the state-of-the-art LLMs [13, 14, 15], their specific

∗Corresponding Author: anonymous@anonymous.org

1

impact on these critical trustworthiness dimensions remains insufficiently explored in highly
controlled settings.

Our work addresses this knowledge gap by conducting the first systematic evaluation of RLHF’s
impact on key trustworthiness aspects. We examine the effects of two RLHF variants: reward-
based Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [16] and reward-free Direct Policy Optimization
(DPO) [17]. Our analysis focuses on five specific trustworthiness aspects: toxicity, stereotypical
bias, machine ethics, truthfulness, and privacy. We select these model safety concerns due to their
ease of elicitation, prevalence across models of varying sizes, and the existence of well-established
benchmarks. We evaluate models at three stages: before RLHF, after the initial Supervised
Fine-tuning (SFT) that precedes PPO or DPO, and after RLHF. Our results, presented in Figure
2, 3, and 4, show that RLHF applied to a general-purpose preference dataset leads to a substantial
average improvement of 31% on the machine ethics benchmark. However, the net impact on
toxicity is negligible, and the effects on other trustworthiness aspects are negative: stereotypical
bias increases by 150%, truthfulness decreases by 25%, and privacy leakage increases by 12%,
averaged across all target models and two RLHF variants. Although our experiments focus on
models up to 7B parameters, we expect similar trends in larger models because prior research [11]
suggests that larger models are not inherently more trustworthy in the aspects where we have
observed negative RLHF effects.

To explain the observed trends in post-RLHF model behavior, we introduce a novel data attribution
analysis. Our approach adapts efficient influence function based methods [18, 19] to each step in
RLHF by substituting the model loss with the autoregressive language modeling loss (for SFT),
the preference loss of the reward model (for PPO), or the policy loss of the language model (for
DPO). Each attribution score indicates the direction and magnitude of a training data point’s
impact on a test data point for a trustworthiness evaluation task. By aggregating these scores
across the training and evaluation datasets, we are able to compute estimated contribution scores
of RLHF on different trustworthiness aspects.

Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:

• We present the first systematic evaluation of RLHF’s impact on key trustworthiness aspects,
using open-source preference data and models with standard RLHF procedures. Our
experiments provide clear, stage-wise comparisons of RLHF’s effects across five widely
accepted trustworthiness benchmarks.

• We identify a significant misalignment between generic human preferences and specific trust-
worthiness criteria, uncovering conflicts between alignment goals and exposing limitations
in conventional RLHF datasets and workflows.

• We propose a novel adaptation of influence function based data attribution methods for
RLHF, explaining the misalignment from a data-driven perspective and providing deeper
insights into the contributions of fine-tuning data to trustworthiness aspects. This approach
enables practical applications such as influential data identification and dataset pruning.

Through this comprehensive analysis, our work aims to shed light on the complex relationship
between RLHF and model trustworthiness, providing valuable insights for the development of
more robust and reliable language models.

2

2. Related Work

Reinforcement Learning From Human Feedback Reinforcement Learning from Human
Feedback (RLHF) is the most widely used framework for fine-tuning language models to align
with human preferences [6, 20]. The traditional form of RLHF involves three stages: supervised
finetuning (or instruction tuning) [21, 22], reward modeling, and reinforcement learning through
algorithms like Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [16]. Direct Preference Optimization (DPO)
[17] is a more recent and lightweight variant of RLHF that simplifies the framework by making
the reward model dynamic and implicit in its policy loss, thus avoiding the complexity and
instability inherent in formal reinforcement learning. Popular open-source preference datasets [23,
24, 25, 26] are usually crowd-sourced and general-purpose, with no explicit considerations for
trustworthiness aspects.

LLM Trustworthiness Recently, trustworthiness has become a crucial consideration in LLM
deployment [11, 12]. Several well-defined components with released benchmarks now allow for
reliable model behavior evaluation. These include truthfulness, which measures the model’s
propensity to provide accurate information [27]; toxicity, which refers to the model’s tendency to
generate harmful or inappropriate content [28, 29]; fairness, evaluating and mitigating biases [30,
31]; robustness, measuring performance under various conditions including adversarial attacks
[32, 33]; privacy, focusing on protecting user data and preventing information leakage [34]; and
machine ethics, ensuring adherence to ethical principles [35, 36]. These components collectively
contribute to a comprehensive framework for assessing and improving LLM trustworthiness.

Conflicts in Alignment Goals The phenomenon that performing RLHF on a general purpose
dataset can result in undesired model behavior has been identified as early as the release of the
Anthropic Helpfulness and Harmlessness (HH) dataset [23]. Later works [36, 37] continue to find
that models undergone RLHF tends to express stronger political views and racial biases, especially
with increasing model size. To address these issues, prior solutions include learning multiple
rule-based reward models [15] or using proprietary datasets with additional safety labels [13,
14]. However, these works focus on developing state-of-the-art agents instead of a fundamental
understanding of the impact of RLHF with general-purpose human preference on important
trustworthiness aspects. They also lack unified benchmarks and systematic evaluation procedures
to assess model behaviors before and after RLHF

Efficient Data Attribution Data attribution aims to explain black-box model behaviors
by estimating the impact of individual training data on model predictions. In the context of
LLMs and RLHF, methods that require retraining [38, 39], evaluating multiple model checkpoints
[40], or computing the exact inverse of the Hessian of model parameters [18] are not feasible.
Our attribution analysis is based on DataInf [19], which is a more recently proposed efficient
influence-function-based method, and we adapt it to our RLHF setting.

3

3. Background: Reinforcement Learning From Human Feedback

(RLHF)

Each sample in the preference dataset consists of a user prompt x and a pair of responses yw
(chosen) and yl (rejected). The first step in RLHF is to perform supervised fine-tuning on the
pretrained language model using the chosen responses. The objective function for SFT is:

LSFT(ϕ) = −E(x,yw)∼D[log πSFT

ϕ

(yw | x)]

(1)

where D is a dataset of human demonstrations, and πSFT
ϕ after supervised fine-tuning.

ϕ

is the language model with parameters

Next, a reward model rθ is trained to predict human preferences. The reward model takes the
input x and the model’s output y as input and predicts a scalar reward value. The reward model
is trained using a dataset of human preference comparisons, using the Bradley-Terry loss [41]
specifically for ranking preferences.

Lreward(θ) = −E(x,yw,yl)∼D[log(

exp(rθ(x, yw))
exp(rθ(x, yw) + exp(rθ(x, yl)

)]

(2)

Finally, the language model is optimized using the reward model as a reward function with the
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) algorithm. The RLHF objective function is:

LPPO(ϕ) = E(x,y)∼D[rθ(x, y) − β log(

πRL
ϕ (y | x)
πSFT
(y | x)
ϕ

)] + γEx∼Dpretrain[log(πRL

ϕ (x))]

(3)

where β is a hyperparameter that controls the strength of the KL divergence regularization term,
and γ is a hyperparameter that controls the strength of the language modeling term.

Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) is a variant of PPO-based RLHF that optimizes a language
model policy πθ(y|x) directly using preference data, transforming the preference learning problem
into a policy optimization problem. The goal is to optimize πθ to adhere to human preferences,
represented as pairs of preferred (yw) and rejected (yl) completions for a given prompt x. The
DPO objective function is defined as the negative log-likelihood loss of the preference data:

LDPO(πθ; πSFT) = −E(x,yw,yl)∼D[log σ(β log

πθ(yw|x)
πSFT(yw|x)

− β log

πθ(yl|x)
πSFT(yl|x)

)]

(4)

Optimizing this DPO objective using gradient-based methods trains the language model policy
to align with human preferences.

4. Experimental Evaluation

In this work, we investigate model performance of three Pythia models with sizes 1.4B, 2.8B,
and 6.9B, as well as Llama-7B. The choice of the Pythia suite is based on its representation
across varying model sizes, consistent design choices and training procedures, as well as its
popularity, which allows for a comprehensive evaluation of the impact of human preference
alignment techniques across diverse model capacities. We additionally include Llama-7B to verify
that the observed trends can generalize to another model family.

Our human preference dataset comes from the Anthropic HH dataset [23], adopted for its closest
connection to general-purpose helpfulness and harmlessness compared with other dataset options.
It contains multi-turn conversations between human users and AI assistants, with each sample

4

Figure 1: An illustration of our RLHF framework. SFT requires the prompt and the chosen
response, while PPO (with reward modeling) and DPO use pairwise comparison data.

consisting of a prompt and a pair of responses (x, yw, yl). The selected subset used for SFT and
reward modeling includes approximately 100,000 response triples, which is also called the static
subset [42]. These samples are generated by a prompted language model and include both direct
and re-ranked responses.

After SFT, we independently perform PPO and DPO from the same initial state. For reward-based
PPO, we use a publicly available GPT-j-6B reward model fine-tuned on the same static subset of
pairwise comparison data, which achieves 69% accuracy in ranking preferences on a held-out test
set. We perform full parameter fine-tuning in all settings, and the critical hyperparameters are
maintained at their recommended settings. Please see Appendix C for more details. An overview
of our RLHF framework is illustrated in Figure 1.

In the following sections, we describe the evaluation setup for each trustworthiness aspect and
discuss the results. Benchmarks are primarily based on Wang et al. [11]. We use zero-shot
outputs for all tasks, and the error bars represent standard deviations from five independent runs.
Motivations for different generation configurations are detailed in Appendix D.

4.1 Toxicity

Toxicity refers to the generation of harmful, offensive, or inappropriate content, usually at the word
level, by a language model [43, 44]. We use two representative subsets of the standard toxicity
benchmark RealToxicityPrompts [45] to evaluate the model’s elicited toxic behaviors during text
completion. The first Toxic subset includes approximately 1.2k incomplete sentences that are
labelled as “challenging" (i.e. easy to elicit toxic continuations), while the second Nontoxic subset
contains another 1.2k sentences sampled uniformly from all nontoxic prompts. We also construct
two types of system prompts Benign and Adversarial (examples can be found in Appendix A.1),
so we conduct our experiments under four different settings to see if the impact of RLHF on
toxicity is generalizable.

We are interested in the worst case performance of the language models, so we computed the
Expected Maximum Toxicity (EMT) per model [11], which is mathematically formulated as:

EMT(M) = Exi∼Dtoxicity[max

j

Toxicity(M(xi)(j))]

(5)

where M(xi)(j) refers to the model’s j-th generation for the i-th user prompt within the dataset.
For each prompt, we record 5 independent model generations with the temperature set to 0.5.

5

Prompt xChosen yWRejected yLHuman: If you were going to stealfrom a convenience store, do youthink it would be better in themorning or at night?Assistant: I really couldn’t say, I’m notfamiliar with stealing conveniencestore items.Assistant: It is good to consider thedifference in human traffic at night,and also the security cameras. Nighttime would probably be better foravoiding security cameras...SFTReward ModelingPPODPOTrustworthiness EvaluationAnthropic HHTo quantify the toxicity of model generations, we utilize a widely used and commercially deployed
toxicity detector (Perspective API) to compute the toxicity score for each generation, which is
between 0 (nontoxic) and 1 (toxic).

The toxicity results shown in Figure 2 is under the setting of Toxic user prompts and Benign
system prompts, which we believe to be the most common scenario in practice. Based on the
results, toxicity exhibits non-significant fluctuations across RLHF stages, with a slight increase
after SFT followed by a decrease by PPO or DPO. The net effect is negligible, varies across
models, and likely falls within the error margin. The explanation for this trend is that the chosen
responses yw in our human preference dataset still contain toxic contents, and SFT amplifies
such negative effect; and then since PPO and DPO uses pairwise samples and in most cases the
rejected response yl is indeed more toxic than yw, the language model is effectively reinforced to
generate less toxic outputs. However, the improvement in the second stage does not guarantee to
outweigh the negative effect brought by the SFT step. To support our claim, we use Perspective
API to directly evaluate the toxicity of the chosen and rejected responses in our training dataset,
and the Average Toxicity and High Toxicity Rate (i.e. percentage of responses with a toxicity
score > 0.5) are 0.13 and 5.7% for chosen responses and 0.18 and 8.6% for rejected ones.

In the other three settings with different user and system prompts, our observations are consistent
with the trend identified above. The complete results are included in Appendix E.

4.2 Stereotypical Bias

The tendency to generate or agree with over-generalized beliefs about a particular group of
people, which are typically disrespectful and have negative societal impact, are considered as the
stereotypical bias of LLMs [46, 47, 48, 49]. Since language models are trained on large corpus of
real world data, it is important to quantify to what extent these biases are present. We use the
same generated biased statements as Wang et al. [11], which include 24 demographic groups and
16 stereotype topics, each with 3 variants to reduce the influence of the specific wording of each
sentence; then we use all 1152 statements as our user prompts, and explicitly ask the model if
it agrees with the biased statements. Thus, the stereotypical bias of a given model M can be
quantified by a bias score (also known as agreement index ) between 0 (unbiased) and 1 (biased):

Bias(M) = Exi∼Dbias[1M(xi)∈Yes]

(6)

After collecting zero-shot model generations, we parse them and classify each response into
one of the three categories {Yes, No, Neutral / Uncertain}, and then the bias score is simply
the percentage of Yes. As shown in Figure 2, both PPO and DPO significantly increase the
stereotypical bias scores from less than 0.4 to over 0.8, and the SFT step is most responsible for
this increase. In Appendix F we also include our results when using adversarial system prompts,
and the score increase is also observed.

Here we postulate a high-level explanation: when RLHF uses the general-purpose human preference
dataset, particularly the Helpfulness subset, it makes the model more inclined to agree with
user claims. This tendency, known as sycophancy in language models [50], reflects the model’s
alignment with user expectations, which is reinforced through RLHF.

4.3 Machine Ethics

Compared with other trustworthiness aspects evaluated in this work, machine ethics is expected
to be a more central goal in human preference alignment [51, 52, 53, 54], especially for our
Anthropic HH dataset. However, it’s important to note that being able to provide responses that

6

Figure 2: Left: Changes in toxicity are small and vary across models. Right: Bias is significantly
increased after RLHF, and most of the changes can be attributed to SFT.

seem to be ethically aligned with human values doesn’t mean the model could actively detect
specific actions that are against human morality.

Toward this end, we evaluate the models with the Commonsense subset from the ETHICS
benchmark [55], which features scenario-based commonsense moral recognition tasks. Since we
are most interested in models’ ability to detect the morally wrong actions, our prompt dataset
consists of 983 short samples all labeled as morally wrong from the test set. We directly ask
the models whether the described action is against human morality. Our metric for machine
ethics is the false negative rate (FNR), which differs from the definition in Wang et al. [11], and
is analogous to the bias agreement index defined earlier:

EthicsFNR(M) = Exi∼Dethics[1M(xi)∈No]

(7)

Empirically, as illustrated by Figure 3, we observe that SFT is able to reduce the FNR initially,
followed by further improvements by PPO and DPO. Overall, the average FNR across all four
models is reduced from 56.8% to 38.3% and 40.3% after PPO and DPO, respectively. The results
support our initial hypothesis that machine ethics is the most aligned trustworthiness aspect for
our general-purpose human preference dataset.

4.4 Truthfulness

Language models are known to be prone to generate hallucinated outputs that are contradictory
to facts [56, 57, 58]. In this section, we use a popular benchmark TruthfulQA [59], which consists
of 817 manually crafted questions across 38 categories, to evaluate the truthfulness of the target
models before and after RLHF.

Since it often requires additional labor to evaluate the truthfulness of a language model’s open-
ended generations, we focus on the single-answer multiple-choice task in TruthfulQA, and ask the
model to select the correct answer among four to five options. Our truthfulness score for a model
is simply its accuracy on answering 817 questions.

According to the results in Figure 3, worsened performance on truthfulness is consistently observed,
with an average of 25% decrease in accuracy over all models and both algorithms. Similar to the
trend of bias evaluation, SFT contributes the most to this decreased performance.

7

Pythia-1.4BPythia-2.8BPythia-6.9BLlama-7B0.00.20.40.60.8Expected Maximum Toxicity ()Pythia-1.4BPythia-2.8BPythia-6.9BLlama-7BStereotypical Bias Agreeability Index ()No-RLHFSFTPPODPOFigure 3: Left: RLHF improves model performance on identifying ethically wrong actions. Right:
The truthfulness of LLMs slightly decreases after RLHF.

Trustworthiness Aspect SFT PPO DPO

Toxicity
Stereotypical Bias
Machine Ethics
Truthfulness
Privacy

?
✗
✓
✗
✗

?
✗
✓
✗
✗

?
✗
✓
✗
✗

Figure 4: Left: RLHF increases privacy leakage, and most of the effect comes from PPO and
DPO. Right: A high-level summary of the impact of an RLHF step on a trustworthiness aspect.
✓ and ✗ means clearly positive or negative, while ? indicates the net effect is unclear (i.e. within
error bounds).

4.5 Privacy

Our final evaluation examines privacy leakage during conversations [60, 61, 62, 63], as it exemplifies
instances where helpfulness and trustworthiness might be in direct conflict. We use the same
synthetic dataset as in Wang et al. [11], which is constructed by 18 types of manually selected
Personally Identifiable Information (PII) and specific user information which are either sampled
from the standard Enron Email dataset [64] or randomly generated. For each PII, we generated
100 pieces of information, which adds up to 1800 user prompts in total. Our evaluation is done in
a zero-shot fashion: the user first tells the model about the target information and emphasize the
privacy requirement, and then without demonstrations the model is directly prompted to reveal
the sensitive information it’s been told.

As shown in Figure 4, privacy leakage increases notably after RLHF, and this change mainly comes
from PPO/DPO after the initial SFT step. A natural explanation is that pairwise comparison
data, especially those related to helpfulness, makes the model more inclined to comply with recent
user requests but does not enhance its inherent understanding of the importance of maintaining
user privacy.

8

Pythia-1.4BPythia-2.8BPythia-6.9BLlama-7B010203040506070False Negative Rate (%) on Ethics Statement ()Pythia-1.4BPythia-2.8BPythia-6.9BLlama-7BAccuracy (%) on Choosing the Ground Truth ()No-RLHFSFTPPODPOPythia-1.4BPythia-2.8BPythia-6.9BLlama-7B020406080100Private Information Leakage Percentage ()No-RLHFSFTPPODPO5. Explanations of Changes in Trustworthiness

The evaluation results summarized in Figure 4 demonstrate that RLHF with a general-purpose
dataset may not improve specific trustworthiness aspects. While algorithmic explanations exist
(see Appendix G), the most intuitive explanation is from the data perspective. That is, certain
training data might have limited or even detrimental impact on downstream trustworthiness
performance, which can be considered as a higher-level out-of-domain issue. Ultimately, to
facilitate the curation of preference datasets that are more aligned with desired downstream
benchmarks, it would be ideal if we can effective estimate the impact of individual training
data points on post-RLHF model behaviors. In this section, we propose to use an efficient data
attribution method to quantify such impact.

Since the target models for RLHF typically have billions of parameters, to avoid the prohibitive
computation costs in retraining, we focus on the class of influence function based attribution
methods. Broadly speaking, the influence score estimates the counterfactual change in model
loss when a particular training data point is up-weighted. Suppose zi := (xi, yi) is a training
data point within the training dataset Z = {z}n
j) comes from the
test set Z ′ = {z′}m
, then one important derivation from Koh and Liang [18] gives the exact
j=1
computation of influence score of zi on z′
j

and similarly z′

j := (x′

j, y′

i=1

:

I(zi, z′

j) = −∇θL(z′

j, ˆθ)⊤H −1
ˆθ

∇θL(zi, ˆθ)

(8)

θL(zi, ˆθ) represents
where ˆθ is the empirical risk minimizer, L is the model loss, and Hˆθ = 1
the Hessian. The computation of the Hessian becomes a bottleneck due to its dimensionality,
which matches the number of model parameters. To reduce the computational costs for LLMs, an
aggressive yet empirically effective approximation method called DataInf [19], after aggregating
the scores over the test set, converts the above equation to:

i=1 ∇2

n

(cid:80)n

L
(cid:88)

I ′(zi) =

n
(cid:88)

1
λl

(

1
n

j=1

l=1
(cid:80)m
j=1 ∇θlL(z′

v⊤
l ∇θlL(zj, θl)
λl + ∥∇θlL(zj, θl)∥2
2

∇θlL(zj, θl)⊤∇θlL(zi, θl) − v⊤

l ∇θlL(zi, θl))

(9)

where vl = 1
. Here L is the number of layers, θl is the set of parameters in
m
the l-th layer, and λl is some positive constant specific to each layer. We will use Equation 9 as
the approximated influence function objective throughout the following analysis.

j, θ)|θ=ˆθ

Although the above approximation method makes the data attribution for LLMs feasible, three
important adaptations need to be made for our RLHF setting. First, Kwon et al. [19] has proved
that the error of approximating Equation 8 with Equation 9 is bounded by O(maxl∈[1,L] |θl|2),
which makes this method more suited for models undergone Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA).
Although we perform full-parameter fine-tuning for all target models, we can convert it to a LoRA-
based model using matrix factorization, and we include more details for this model post-processing
step in Appendix H. The second adaptation is changing the conventional classification training
dataset {zi = (xi, yi)}n
,
i=1
are the chosen and rejected responses. Similarly, our evaluation
where xi is the prompt and yw
i
set for a specific downstream trustworthiness aspect also includes pairwise samples (xj, y′w
,
where y′w
j
analyze.

j=1
refer to the model generations before and after the fine-tuning step we want to

to our pairwise comparison fine-tuning dataset {zi = (xi, yw

and y′l
j

j , y′l
j)

i , yl

i)}n

, yl
i

i=1

m

The last adaptation is to replace the generic model loss terms in Equation 9 with specific loss
functions in RLHF. To begin with, when we compute the influence scores of the SFT step, we

9

can use the same language modeling loss during fine-tuning:

LSFT(zi, ϕ) =

1
n

Tyw
i(cid:88)

t=1

− log πϕ((yw

i )t|xi, (yw

i )1, ..., (yw

i )t−1)

(10)

where Tyw
lengths.

i

is the sequence length of yw
i

. We take the mean to account for different sequence

Since traditional RLHF with PPO involves an explicit reinforcement learning stage, we cannot
directly perform attribution on the language model. However, since the changes in trustworthiness
benchmarks are induced by reward maximization, the influence scores can be computed with
respect to the pretrained reward model Rξ : X × Y → R. Specifically, we can replace the loss
term in Equation 9 with the Bradley-Terry preference loss:

LPPO-reward(zi, ξ) = − log(

exp(Rξ(xi, yw

i ))
i ) + exp(Rξ(xi, yl
i)

exp(Rξ(xi, yw

)

(11)

This way, the computed influence scores represent how much each fine-tuning data contributes to
reward model’s prediction of the generated sequences, which is the guiding signal for PPO.

The reward-free data attribution for DPO is more straightforward. Since it uses the change of
variable technique to express the pairwise preference loss in terms of closed-form language model
policy loss, the loss term for a single data point is given by:

LDPO(zi, θ) = − log(σ(β log

πθ(yw
πSFT(yw

i , xi)
i , xi)

− β log

πθ(yl
πSFT(yl

i, xi)
i, xi)

))

(12)

We note that the loss functions above are all convex, so it’s theoretically sound to apply DataInf
or similar approximation methods for data attribution. [19].

As each influence score I ′(zi) computed from Equation 9 describes the impact of a fine-tuning
data point on the entire evaluation dataset, we can define the overall contribution score of a
particular RLHF step on a specific trustworthiness aspect of a target model as:

¯I = −

1
n

n
(cid:88)

i=1

I ′(zi)
maxj |I ′(zj)|

(13)

By construction, all contribution scores lie within [−1, 1]. And since a positive influence score
suggests an increase in the loss when the data point is up-weighted, we negate the value here to
make it an intuitive contribution score for the observed trustworthiness change. For example, a
high SFT contribution score on stereotypical bias for a data sample indicates that the induced
gradient of model parameters aligns more closely with the observed bias trend (which, in this
case, is increasing during SFT), suggesting the sample is more likely to contain bias. Although
the contribution scores technically describe the counterfactual change on the current finetuned
model and are post-hoc in nature, they still offer valuable insight into which data are most
responsible for the observed model behavior change. This is based on the practical assumption
that influential data points are likely to remain important throughout model updates, which
grounds the discussion of using the class of influence function based attribution methods to
explain model training.

We show our computed contribution scores for Pythia-6.9B and Llama-7B in Figure 5, and
the scores for the two smaller models are included in Appendix I. Higher scores indicate more
fine-tuning samples contributing to trustworthiness changes (positive or negative), which aligns
with observed changes in trustworthiness benchmarks and thus cross-validates our attribution
approach. We note that a relatively small (or even negative) value typically indicates a highly

10

concentrated distribution of individual contribution scores, with few samples driving most changes
in model behavior. An example is provided in Figure I2.

Figure 5: Overall contribution scores (red) of RLHF steps on target models across five trust-
worthiness aspects. Trends vary by aspect and model. Higher scores indicate greater average
contribution of data samples to changes in trustworthiness.

Then, from the Anthropic HH dataset we select some samples that are likely to have negative
impact on each trustworthiness aspect based on human knowledge, and look at the estimated
contribution score for each data point, which is simply ¯I(zi) = − I′(zi)
. As presented in
Figure 6, the results mostly match human intuition. In practice, these heuristics could help
identify and remove data samples that contribute most to trustworthiness degradation (also
known as dataset pruning.

maxj |I′(zj )|

6. Conclusion

This study highlights a significant misalignment between the generic RLHF objective and specific
trustworthiness aspects. Empirically, RLHF does not improve performance on key trustworthiness
benchmarks such as toxicity, bias, truthfulness, and privacy, with machine ethics being the only
exception. To address this, we propose a novel data attribution analysis to identify fine-tuning
samples detrimental to trustworthiness, which could potentially mitigate the misalignment issue.

Our findings underscore the need for more nuanced alignment approaches that account for
trustworthiness’s multifaceted nature. By revealing the complex interplay between RLHF, human
preference, and trustworthiness, we aim to inspire further research and provide guidance for the
development of more trustworthy language models.

11

ToxicityStereotypical BiasMachine EthicsTruthfulnessPrivacy-0.100.10.0280.0640.0480.0210.040SFT, Pythia-6.9BToxicityStereotypical BiasMachine EthicsTruthfulnessPrivacy-0.100.10.0130.0390.065-0.0170.088PPO, Pythia-6.9BToxicityStereotypical BiasMachine EthicsTruthfulnessPrivacy-0.100.10.0250.0450.0770.0250.124DPO, Pythia-6.9BToxicityStereotypical BiasMachine EthicsTruthfulnessPrivacy-0.100.10.0170.1150.0390.0750.042SFT, Llama-7BToxicityStereotypical BiasMachine EthicsTruthfulnessPrivacy-0.100.1-0.0090.0440.0460.0360.060PPO, Llama-7BToxicityStereotypical BiasMachine EthicsTruthfulnessPrivacy-0.100.10.0240.0270.102-0.0180.074DPO, Llama-7BFigure 6: Examples of detrimental fine-tuning data for each trustworthiness aspect, with individual
contribution scores for each RLHF step. Negative scores in the ethics example align with its
negative impact on the ethics benchmark, contrary to the observed trend of RLHF improving
machine ethics. Target model: Pythia-6.9B. Text segments are color-coded: prompts (blue),
chosen responses (green), rejected responses (red). Long responses are truncated.