---
paper_id: 2305.10429
source: arxiv
title: DoReMi
converted_at: 2026-03-14T16:45:58.534542
note: "Content extracted before References section"
---

3
2
0
2

v
o
N
1
2

]
L
C
.
s
c
[

4
v
9
2
4
0
1
.
5
0
3
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

DoReMi: Optimizing Data Mixtures Speeds Up Language
Model Pretraining

Sang Michael Xie∗1,2, Hieu Pham1, Xuanyi Dong1, Nan Du1, Hanxiao Liu1, Yifeng Lu1,
Percy Liang2, Quoc V. Le1, Tengyu Ma2, and Adams Wei Yu1

1Google DeepMind
2Stanford University

Abstract

The mixture proportions of pretraining data domains (e.g., Wikipedia, books, web text) greatly affect lan-
guage model (LM) performance. In this paper, we propose Domain Reweighting with Minimax Optimization
(DoReMi), which first trains a small proxy model using group distributionally robust optimization (Group
DRO) over domains to produce domain weights (mixture proportions) without knowledge of downstream
tasks. We then resample a dataset with these domain weights and train a larger, full-sized model. In our
experiments, we use DoReMi on a 280M-parameter proxy model to set the domain weights for training an
8B-parameter model (30x larger) more efficiently. On The Pile, DoReMi improves perplexity across all domains,
even when it downweights a domain. DoReMi improves average few-shot downstream accuracy by 6.5%
points over a baseline model trained using The Pile’s default domain weights and reaches the baseline accuracy
with 2.6x fewer training steps. On the GLaM dataset, DoReMi, which has no knowledge of downstream tasks,
even matches the performance of using domain weights tuned on downstream tasks.

1 Introduction

Datasets for training language models (LMs) are typically sampled from a mixture of many do-
mains (Brown et al., 2020, Chowdhery et al., 2022, Du et al., 2021, Gao et al., 2020). For example, The
Pile (Gao et al., 2020), a large publicly available dataset, is composed of 24% web data, 9% Wikipedia,
4% GitHub, etc.1 The composition of the pretraining data greatly affects the effectiveness of an
LM (Du et al., 2021, Hoffmann et al., 2022, Xie et al., 2023). However, it is unclear how much of each
domain to include to produce a model that performs well for a wide variety of downstream tasks.
Existing works determine domain weights (the sampling probabilities for each domain) by using
intuition or a set of downstream tasks. For example, The Pile uses heuristically-chosen domain
weights, which could be suboptimal. On the other hand, existing LMs such as PaLM (Chowdhery
et al., 2022) and GLaM (Du et al., 2021) tune the domain weights based on a set of downstream tasks,
but requires training potentially thousands of LMs on different domain weights and risks overfitting
to the particular set of downstream tasks.
Instead of optimizing domain weights based on a set of downstream tasks, our approach aims to
find domain weights which lead to models that perform well on all domains by minimizing the

∗Work done while interning at Google DeepMind. Correspondence: <Sang Michael Xie: anonymous@anonymous.org>, <Hieu

Pham: anonymous@anonymous.org>, <Adams Wei Yu: anonymous@anonymous.org>.

1The domain weights, which are based on token count in this paper, varies by tokenizer; see Appendix C.

1

Figure 1: Given a dataset with a set of domains, Domain Reweighting with Minimax Optimization
(DoReMi) optimizes the domain weights to improve language models trained on the dataset. First,
DoReMi uses some initial reference domain weights to train a reference model (Step 1). The reference
model is used to guide the training of a small proxy model using group distributionally robust
optimization (Group DRO) over domains (Nemirovski et al., 2009, Oren et al., 2019, Sagawa et al.,
2020), which we adapt to output domain weights instead of a robust model (Step 2). We then use
the tuned domain weights to train a large model (Step 3).

worst-case excess loss over domains, following Mindermann et al. (2022), Oren et al. (2019). The
excess loss is the loss gap between the model being evaluated and a pretrained reference model.
This motivates our algorithm, Domain Reweighting with Minimax Optimization (DoReMi), which
leverages distributionally robust optimization (DRO) to tune the domain weights without knowledge
of downstream tasks (Figure 1). First, DoReMi trains a small reference model (e.g., 280M parameters)
in a standard way. Second, DoReMi trains a small distributionally robust language model (DRO-LM)
(Oren et al., 2019), which minimizes the worst-case excess loss (relative to the reference’s model’s
loss) across all domains. Notably, rather than using the robust LM, we take the domain weights
produced by DRO training. Finally, we train a large (8B) LM on a new dataset defined by these
domain weights.
Our approach adapts the DRO-LM framework (Oren et al., 2019) to optimize domain weights instead
of producing a robust model. To do this, DoReMi uses the online learning-based optimizer from
Group DRO (Nemirovski et al., 2009, Sagawa et al., 2020), which dynamically updates domain
weights according to the loss on each domain for rescaling the training objective, instead of sub-
selecting examples from a minibatch as in Mindermann et al. (2022), Oren et al. (2019). Finally,
DoReMi takes the averaged domain weights over DRO training steps.
In Section 3, we run DoReMi on 280M proxy and reference models to optimize domain weights on
The Pile (Gao et al., 2020) and the GLaM dataset (Du et al., 2021) (used in PaLM (Chowdhery et al.,
2022)). The DoReMi domain weights are used to train an 8B parameter LM (over 30x larger). On
The Pile, DoReMi reduces perplexity on all domains over baseline domain weights, even when it
downweights a domain. DoReMi improves average downstream accuracy over a baseline model
trained on The Pile’s default domain weights by 6.5% points on generative few-shot tasks and
achieves the baseline downstream accuracy 2.6x faster (Figure 2). In Section 4, we find that DoReMi
consistently improves LM training when varying the sizes of the proxy model and the main model
trained with optimized domain weights. On the GLaM dataset where domain weights tuned on

2

Figure 2: DoReMi optimizes domain weights with a small model (280M params) and uses these
domain weights to train a much larger model (8B params, 30x larger). Here, optimizing the domain
weights (training a small model twice) takes 8% of the compute of training the large model. DoReMi
improves average one-shot downstream accuracy by 6.5% points and reaches the baseline accuracy
2.6x faster when pretraining on The Pile.

downstream tasks are available, DoReMi even performs comparably to tuning domain weights on
downstream task performance.2

2 Domain Reweighting with Minimax Optimization (DoReMi)

In this section we define DoReMi, an algorithm for using a small proxy model to optimize the
domain weights of a language modeling dataset, which then improves the training of a large model.

Setup. Suppose that we have k domains (e.g., Wikipedia, GitHub), where for each domain i, we
have a set of examples Di. Domain weights α ∈ ∆k specify a probability distribution over the k
domains, and consequently a distribution over the training data: Pα = (cid:80)k
i=1 αi · unif(Di) where
unif(D) = 1
x∈D δx is the uniform distribution over the examples in D and δx(x′) is 1 if x′ = x
|D|
and 0 otherwise.

(cid:80)

DoReMi. The inputs of DoReMi are the data D1, . . . , Dk, reference domain weights αref (e.g.,
uniform or based on raw token count of each domain), and training hyperparameters for the large,
full-size model (number of training steps T and batch size b). DoReMi returns optimized domain
weights ¯α and ultimately, a large model trained on P ¯α.

Step 1: Obtain a small reference model. We first train a model pref on some reference domain
weights αref (e.g., based on raw token count as a default) for T steps, batch size b. This model serves
as the reference model for step 2 and captures a baseline level of difficulty of each example/domain.
The reference model can be a relatively small model (280M parameters in our experiments).

2A public re-implementation of DoReMi and optimized domain weights for The Pile can be found at https://

github.com/sangmichaelxie/doremi.

3

Step 2: Train proxy model with Group DRO to obtain domain weights. To obtain domain weights,
we train a small proxy model pθ in the distributionally robust language modeling (DRO-LM) (Oren
et al., 2019) framework with the Group DRO optimizer (Sagawa et al., 2020), where θ are the weights
of the proxy model. This framework trains a robust model by optimizing the worst-case loss over
domains, which is equivalent to the following minimax objective:

min
θ

max
α∈∆k

L(θ, α) :=

(cid:34)

αi ·

k
(cid:88)

i=1

1

(cid:80)

x∈Di

|x|

(cid:88)

x∈Di

(cid:35)

ℓθ(x) − ℓref(x)

(1)

where the losses ℓθ(x) = − log pθ(x) and ℓref(x) = − log pref(x) are the negative log-likelihoods of
the proxy and reference models respectively in this paper, and |x| is the number of tokens in an
example x. The objective aims to minimize the worst-case excess loss across domains because the
inner maximization over α puts all the weight on the domain with the highest excess loss.
Intuitively, the excess loss (ℓθ(x) − ℓref(x)) measures the headroom for the proxy model to improve,
with respect to the reference model, on example x. Examples with higher excess loss are those where
the reference model achieves low loss (such that the example is “learnable”) but the proxy model
still has high loss. Examples with low excess loss may be very high entropy (i.e. optimal loss is high,
and thus the reference loss is high) or very low entropy (i.e., easy to learn, and thus the proxy loss is
low). The Group DRO optimizer works by interleaving exponentiated gradient ascent updates on
domain weights αt with gradient updates on the proxy model weights θt over training steps t. The
optimizer updates αt to upweight domains with high excess loss, which scales up the proxy model’s
gradient update on examples from these domains. Following Nemirovski et al. (2009), we return the
average weights over the training trajectory ¯α = 1
i=1 αt as the optimized domain weights to use
T
in step 3.

(cid:80)T

Step 3: Train large model with new domain weights. The tuned domain weights ¯α define a new
training distribution P ¯α. We resample the data from this new distribution to train a main model
(larger than the reference/proxy models), using a standard training procedure.

Algorithm 1 DoReMi domain reweighting (Step 2)
Require: Domain data D1, . . . , Dk, number of training steps T , batch size b, step size η, smoothing

parameter c ∈ [0, 1] (e.g., c =1e-3 in our implementation).
Initialize proxy weights θ0
Initialize domain weights α0 = 1
for t from 1 to T do

k 1

Sample minibatch B = {x1, . . . , xj} of size b from Pu, where u = 1
Let |x| be the token length of example x (|x| ≤ L)
Compute per-domain excess losses for each domain i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , k} (ℓθ,j(x) is j-th token-level

k 1

loss):

λt[i] ←

(cid:80)

1

(cid:80)

x∈B∩Di

|x|

(cid:80)|x|

j=1 max{ℓθt−1,j(x) − ℓref,j(x), 0}

x∈B∩Di

Update domain weights (exp is entrywise): α′
Renormalize and smooth domain weights: αt ← (1 − c)
Update proxy model weights θt for the objective L(θt−1, αt) (using Adam, Adafactor, etc.)

t ← αt−1 exp(ηλt)

α′
t
i=1 α′

+ cu

t[i]

(cid:80)k

end for
return 1
T

(cid:80)T

t=1 αt

4

Details for Step 2. Algorithm 1 provides the pseudocode for Step 2. The main structure of
Algorithm 1 is a training loop which updates the proxy model over T steps. At each step, we
follow Sagawa et al. (2020) and sample a minibatch with uniform domain weights (regardless of
the reference domain weights αref, which only affects the reference model). We then compute the
per-domain excess losses, normalized by the total number of tokens in each domain, and use them
to update the domain weights αt at each step. We first compute the per-domain excess loss at a per-
token level and then aggregate, where the token-level losses at index j are ℓθt−1,j(x) = − log pθt−1(xj |
x1, . . . , xj−1) and ℓref,j(x) = − log pref(xj | x1, . . . , xj−1). Since the Group DRO optimizer (Sagawa
et al., 2020) requires a non-negative loss, we clip the per-token excess loss at 0. Finally, we update
the proxy model for the objective L(θt−1, αt) using a standard optimizer such as Adam (Kingma
and Ba, 2015) or Adafactor (Shazeer and Stern, 2018). All experiments in this paper use Adafactor.
We set the domain weight update step size to η = 1 and the smoothing parameter to c =1e-3 in all
our experiments and did not extensively tune these hyperparameters.

Iterated DoReMi. We extend DoReMi by running it for multiple rounds, setting the reference
domain weights αref for the next round to be ¯α from the previous round. We call this iterated DoReMi.
The entire iterated process still only uses small models for tuning domain weights. We stop iterating
when the domain weights converge, which we define as when maximum change in any domain
weight ∥¯α − αref∥∞ is less than 1e-3. Empirically, this takes only 3 rounds on the GLaM dataset
(Section 3.2).

3 DoReMi Improves LM Training Efficiency and Performance

In this section, we use DoReMi domain weights optimized with a 280M-parameter proxy model to
train a 8B-parameter main model (30x larger). We consider two datasets, The Pile (Gao et al., 2020)
and the GLaM dataset (Du et al., 2021). On The Pile, DoReMi reduces perplexity significantly on
every domain, improves average downstream accuracy on generative one-shot tasks by 6.5%, and
achieves the baseline accuracy 2.6x faster. On the GLaM dataset where domain weights tuned on
downstream datasets are available, DoReMi finds domain weights with comparable performance to
downstream-tuned domain weights.

3.1 Experimental setup

The Pile dataset. The Pile (Gao et al., 2020) is a 800GB text dataset with 22 domains (Table 1).
The default domain weights were determined heuristically. We use the default domain weights
from The Pile dataset to train the baseline and as the reference domain weights αref in DoReMi (see
Appendix C).

GLaM dataset. The GLaM dataset (Du et al., 2021) (also used in training PaLM (Chowdhery
et al., 2022)) includes text from 8 domains (Table 2). For comparison, the GLaM domain weights
(downstream-tuned) were tuned according to the downstream performance of models trained on
each domain and the size of each domain (Du et al., 2021). We consider this an oracle comparison,
since these domain weights are tuned on downstream tasks that are in our evaluation set. We use
uniform domain weights both for training the baseline and the reference domain weights αref for
DoReMi.

Training setup. We train Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) decoder-only LMs with the standard
next-token language modeling loss. We conduct a controlled comparison by equalizing the amount
of compute, measured by the number of tokens processed during training. For The Pile, we train

5

each model for 200k steps; for the GLaM dataset, we train each model for 300k steps. All models use
a batch size of 512 and maximum token length of 1024. The proxy and reference models have 280M
parameters. All models are trained from scratch (other hyperparameters are in Appendix C).

Evaluation. We use held-out validation data to measure the perplexity on each domain. For down-
stream evaluation, we use the generative one-shot tasks from the GPT-3 paper (Brown et al., 2020):
TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017), NaturalQuestions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), WebQuestions (Berant
et al., 2013), SQuADv2 (Rajpurkar et al., 2018), and LAMBADA (Paperno et al., 2016). We use the
standard exact-match accuracy metric for the these datasets. The performance on these datasets
(particularly TriviaQA) has been shown to correlate well with model scale even at the 100M–1B
range (Brown et al., 2020).

Compute used for optimizing domain weights. We train two 280M models (the reference and
proxy models) to optimize the domain weights. This is 8% of the FLOPs required to train the main
8B model. All FLOPs come from standard forward and backward passes.

Notation for model sizes in DoReMi. We denote the size of the reference/proxy models (which
are always the same size in our experiments) and the size of the main model trained with DoReMi
domain weights as “DoReMi (size of reference/proxy→size of main model)”: for example, DoReMi
(280M→8B). When we are discussing the optimized domain weights independently of the main
model, we only include one number (e.g., DoReMi (280M)) which refers to the reference/proxy
model size.

3.2 DoReMi improves perplexity and downstream accuracy

We show that DoReMi significantly improves both the perplexity and downstream accuracy of 8B
models trained on The Pile and the GLaM dataset over their respective baseline domain weights.

(a) The Pile

(b) GLaM dataset

Figure 3: Average one-shot downstream accuracy (exact match) on 5 tasks, with 8B parameter
models trained on The Pile (left) and the GLaM dataset (right). On The Pile, DoReMi improves
downstream accuracy by 6.5% points and achieves the baseline accuracy 2.6x faster (same plot as
Figure 2). On the GLaM dataset, iterated DoReMi (round 2) attains comparable performance to
oracle domain weights tuned with downstream tasks that are in our evaluation set.

6

Figure 4: Per-domain log-perplexity of 8B models on The Pile. Despite downweighting some
domains, DoReMi improves log-perplexity on all domains.

Table 1: Domain weights on The Pile. Baseline domain weights are computed from the default Pile
dataset. DoReMi (280M) uses a 280M proxy model to optimize the domain weights.

Domain

Baseline DoReMi (280M) Difference

Domain

Baseline DoReMi (280M) Difference

Pile-CC
YoutubeSubtitles
PhilPapers
HackerNews
Enron Emails
EuroParl
Ubuntu IRC
BookCorpus2
NIH ExPorter
OpenSubtitles
Gutenberg (PG-19)

0.1121
0.0042
0.0027
0.0075
0.0030
0.0043
0.0074
0.0044
0.0052
0.0124
0.0199

0.6057
0.0502
0.0274
0.0134
0.0070
0.0062
0.0093
0.0061
0.0063
0.0047
0.0072

+0.4936
+0.0460
+0.0247
+0.0059
+0.0040
+0.0019
+0.0019
+0.0017
+0.0011
-0.0077
-0.0127

DM Mathematics
Wikipedia (en)
OpenWebText2
Github
FreeLaw
USPTO Backgrounds
Books3
PubMed Abstracts
StackExchange
ArXiv
PubMed Central

0.0198
0.0919
0.1247
0.0427
0.0386
0.0420
0.0676
0.0845
0.0929
0.1052
0.1071

0.0018
0.0699
0.1019
0.0179
0.0043
0.0036
0.0224
0.0113
0.0153
0.0036
0.0046

-0.0180
-0.0220
-0.0228
-0.0248
-0.0343
-0.0384
-0.0452
-0.0732
-0.0776
-0.1016
-0.1025

Downstream accuracy improves on The Pile. Figure 3 (left) shows the average downstream
performance for baseline and DoReMi (280M→8B) models on The Pile. DoReMi improves the
downstream accuracy by 6.5% points and achieves the baseline accuracy within 75k steps — 2.6x
faster than the baseline (200k steps). Thus, DoReMi can dramatically speed up training and improve
downstream performance.

DoReMi can reduce perplexity across all domains without a tradeoff. Figure 4 shows the per-
domain log-perplexity of the 8B models on The Pile. DoReMi significantly reduces the perplexity
over the baseline across all domains, despite allocating lower weight to some domains. How
can this occur? One hypothesis is that the domains with the lowest and highest entropy can be
downweighted without impacting the perplexity much. The lowest entropy domains statistically
require few samples to learn. The highest entropy domains have token distributions that are close to
common uniform priors — for example, models at random initialization tend to output a uniform
next token distribution. Thus, we need less samples to fit these domains. Positive transfer from
allocating more samples to medium entropy domains can then improve perplexity on all domains.
In Appendix D, we provide a simple example where reweighting domains can improve perplexity
on all domains and DoReMi finds such domain weights in simulations.

7

Table 2: Domain weights in the GLaM dataset. Iterated DoReMi (280M) converges within 3 rounds,
with a similar overall pattern to domain weights tuned on downstream tasks.
Round 1 Round 2 Round 3 Downstream-tuned

Wikipedia
Filtered webpages
Conversations
Forums
Books
News

0.09
0.44
0.10
0.16
0.11
0.10

0.05
0.51
0.22
0.04
0.17
0.02

0.05
0.51
0.22
0.04
0.17
0.02

0.06
0.42
0.27
0.02
0.20
0.02

Iterated DoReMi achieves performance of downstream-tuned weights on the GLaM dataset.
We employ iterated DoReMi on the GLaM dataset over 3 rounds. We find that the second and
third round domain weights are almost identical (Table 2). Figure 3 (right) shows one-shot results
for the first two rounds of iterated DoReMi. After the first round, the DoReMi main model has
comparable downstream accuracy to the baseline (uniform domain weights). After the second round,
the DoReMi main model achieves comparable downstream accuracy to oracle domain weights tuned
on downstream tasks in our evaluation set. Overall, domain reweighting has a smaller effect on
GLaM, possibly because there are only 8 domains compared to 22 in The Pile.

Inspecting the DoReMi domain weights. Tables 1 and 2 present the DoReMi domain weights
for The Pile and the GLaM dataset. When running DoReMi on a 280M proxy model (DoReMi
(280M)), most weight is put on the diverse Pile-CC web text domain. Note that Wikipedia is
downweighted in comparison to the baseline, but DoReMi still improves the downstream accuracy
on tasks derived from Wikipedia (e.g., TriviaQA, Appendix Table 5). Domain weights for a 1B
proxy model (Appendix 8) shows a different trend, where OpenWebText is the mostly upweighted
instead of Pile-CC. This suggests that there may be multiple possible local minima in the domain
weight space. On the GLaM dataset, the DoReMi weights have the same general pattern as the
downstream-tuned domain weights. DoReMi is able to recover a similar set of domain weights by
starting from uniform initial reference domain weights, without any use of downstream data.

4 Ablations and Analysis Across Scales

Previously in Section 3, we showed that DoReMi finds domain weights using 280M models that can
improve training of 8B models. In this section, we conduct an analysis of DoReMi where we vary
the scale of the proxy model in relation to the main model and ablate the components of the excess
loss objective.

DoReMi improves LMs consistently across scales. We consider using proxy and main models of
the same size to analyze DoReMi’s behavior in a simple setting, without the need for the domain
weights to generalize across scales. Note that this is just for scientific purposes since this does not
save compute in practice. In particular, we run DoReMi (X→X) where X is 280M, 510M, 760M, or
1B on The Pile. Figure 5 shows that DoReMi consistently improves downstream accuracy over
the baseline by 2% and achieves the baseline accuracy 4x faster on average across scales, and this
improvement does not shrink with larger model size. DoReMi improves the worst-case perplexity on
all scales and improves 18 of 22 individual domain perplexities on average across scales (Appendix
Table 6). These experiments give a rough picture of how much is lost when using a smaller proxy
model; our DoReMi (280M→8B) model achieves the baseline accuracy 2.6x faster, while matching
the proxy and main model sizes results in a 4x average speedup.

8

Figure 5: Average one-shot downstream accuracy across 4 model scales (280M, 510M, 760M, 1B)
where the reference/proxy models for DoReMi are the same size as the main model trained with
DoReMi domain weights. DoReMi consistently improves downstream accuracy across scales, with a
similar 3% accuracy gap at 200k steps at most scales (except for 510M). DoReMi achieves the baseline
accuracy 4x faster on average across scales.

Proxy model underperforms main model, especially at larger sizes. Recall that DoReMi uses
Group DRO to train a proxy model, which reweights the objective with the domain weights. In
contrast, the main model is trained by resampling on the domain weights from DoReMi. When
the proxy model and the main model are the same size, which one is the better model? Table 3b
shows that the proxy model typically underperforms the main model in this case. The gap between
the proxy and main model increases with scale, as the 1B proxy model not only underperforms
the 1B main model but also the 1B baseline model, while the 280M proxy model achieves better
perplexity than the 280M baseline model on 19/22 domains. Despite the relatively poor quality
of the 1B proxy model, the domain weights still allow the 1B main model to achieve the baseline
performance over 2x faster. This suggests that DoReMi can succeed even if the proxy model is not
trained well. However, we hypothesize that the mismatch between the proxy and main model
training (loss reweighting vs. resampling) explains their performance difference and therefore a
resampling-based Group DRO optimizer may improve DoReMi for larger proxy models.

Effect of proxy model scale on larger main model’s performance. We consider 70M, 150M, 280M,
and 1B scales for the DoReMi proxy model while fixing the main model size at 8B (DoReMi (X→8B)).
From 70M to 280M, increasing the proxy model size improves downstream accuracy at 8B (Figure 6

9

Figure 6: Average downstream accuracy for models trained on The Pile. (Left) Increasing the size
of the reference/proxy models from 70M to 280M in DoReMi improves downstream accuracy for
a 8B main model, but the trend does not continue for the 1B proxy model. We hypothesize that
the Group DRO optimizer is worse for larger proxy models. Right) Optimizing for the hardest or
easiest domains rather than excess loss (which combines both) do not achieve the same average
downstream accuracy as DoReMi (280M models).

Table 3: Summary of per-domain log-perplexities on The Pile (22 total domains). Average log-
perplexity is an unweighted average of the per-domain log-perplexities.

(a) Varying the size of the proxy/reference model and
training at 8B.

Worst-case

log-ppl Avg log-ppl

# domains
beating baseline

Baseline (8B)
DoReMi (70M->8B)
DoReMi (150M->8B)
DoReMi (280M->8B)
DoReMi (1B->8B)

1.71
1.63
1.56
1.46
1.58

1.64
1.53
1.52
1.40
1.54

0/22
22/22
22/22
22/22
22/22

(b) Perplexity of the DoReMi main model and proxy model
of the same size. Although the 1B proxy model is relatively
poor quality, the resulting domain weights still improve
the main model.

Worst-case

log-ppl Avg log-ppl

# domains
beating baseline

Baseline (280M)
DoReMi (280M->280M)
Proxy (280M)

Baseline (1B)
DoReMi (1B->1B)
Proxy (1B)

2.39
2.19
2.33

1.94
1.92
2.11

2.32
2.13
2.27

1.87
1.83
2.02

0/22
22/22
19/22

0/22
19/22
0/22

left). We hypothesize that this trend does not continue for the 1B proxy model because the Group
DRO optimizer is worse at larger scales (Table 3b). While DoReMi (280M→8B) results in the most
improvement at 8B, DoReMi (150M→8B) and DoReMi (1B→8B) still achieve the baseline accuracy
almost 2x faster. This suggests that DoReMi is robust to the proxy model scale. In practice, we
suggest choosing a relatively small proxy model size (280M) to save compute.

Choosing the easiest or hardest domains do not suffice. We ablate the components of the excess
loss metric ℓθ(x) − ℓref(x) by running DoReMi using only the loss of the proxy model pθ on example
x, i.e. ℓθ(x) (prefer hardest domains for the proxy model) or only the negative loss of the reference
−ℓref(x) (prefer easiest domains for the reference model). Figure 6 (right) shows that neither of the
components of the excess loss alone are sufficient to achieve the gains of DoReMi.

10

5 Related Work

Curating pretraining data for LMs. Most closely related is the GLaM dataset (Du et al., 2021) (also
used for training PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2022)), which has domain weights that are tuned using
downstream data. Optimizing domain weights for downstream tasks can be expensive and could
require search/zero-order optimization (Snoek et al., 2012), RL (Zoph and Le, 2016), or heuristic
assumptions on how positive/negative transfer between domains work. Example-level filtering also
brings benefits for LM training. The C4 dataset (Raffel et al., 2019) shows gains over CommonCrawl
via heuristic data cleaning methods. Du et al. (2021), Xie et al. (2023) show that filtering the data at
an example level for high-quality text that look like Wikipedia and books can significantly improve
downstream performance for LMs.
In contrast to these works, DoReMi sets domain weights
automatically with only two small LM training runs and does not make assumptions about the type
of data to prefer (Wikipedia-like, etc.).

General data selection methods. Moore-Lewis selection (Axelrod, 2017, Feng et al., 2022, Moore
and Lewis, 2010) selects examples with high cross-entropy difference (similar to excess log-
perplexity) between language models trained on target and raw data. In contrast, DoReMi reweights
the data without a target distribution. Coleman et al. (2020) select examples based on the uncertainty
of a small proxy model for active learning, while DoReMi uses DRO on the excess loss with respect
to a reference model, and focuses on data mixture reweighting. Mindermann et al. (2022) select
examples in an online fashion by taking the top k examples in a minibatch according to excess loss.
DoReMi optimizes the data mixture before training, allowing the larger main model to train in a
standard way. Many other works on data selection are in vision (Kaushal et al., 2019, Killamsetty
et al., 2021a,b,c, Mirzasoleiman et al., 2020, Paul et al., 2021, Sener and Savarese, 2018, Sorscher
et al., 2022, Wang et al., 2020, Wei et al., 2015) and mainly focus on example-level subset selection
with metrics such as gradient matching. Overall, these methods do not address data selection for
pretraining, where the downstream data distribution may be very different from the pretraining
distribution. DoReMi aims to address the pretraining/downstream distribution shift with a robust
optimization approach. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to show that reweighting the
data according to losses of a small proxy LM can improve the training efficiency of much larger LM.

Distributionally robust optimization. Within DRO methods for deep learning (Ben-Tal et al., 2013,
Oren et al., 2019, Sagawa et al., 2020, Sinha et al., 2018), we target a restricted form of shift called
group shifts (Duchi et al., 2019, Oren et al., 2019, Sagawa et al., 2020), where the test distribution
can be an unknown mixture of groups (domains). We follow DRO-LM (Oren et al., 2019), which
employs DRO for LMs in the group shift setting. DRO-LM also uses a baselined loss, but with a
simple bigram reference model. DoReMi uses a reference model of the same size and architecture
as the proxy model to ensure that the losses are on a similar scale. During optimization, DRO-LM
takes a worst-case subset of each minibatch to update the model on, while we use the Group DRO
optimizer (Sagawa et al., 2020) which doesn’t require online subselection. If we equalize the number
of examples in each minibatch used for gradient updates, online subselelction is more expensive
than Group DRO since it requires running forward passes on a larger minibatch (e.g., double the
minibatch size) before selecting a subset to update the model with. In comparison, the Group DRO
optimizer updates the model on all examples in a weighted fashion. Overall, in contrast to these
DRO methods which aim to produce robust models, we use DRO to optimize the data for training
larger models more efficiently.

Data-centric AI. Large-scale datasets and benchmarks have driven much of the recent progress
in AI, including vision, NLP, and multimodal models (Deng et al., 2009, Gadre et al., 2023, Gao

11

et al., 2020, Raffel et al., 2019, Rajpurkar et al., 2016, Russakovsky et al., 2015, Schuhmann et al., 2022,
Wang et al., 2019). However, most datasets are still painstakingly created with human-generated
data, manual work, and heuristics (Deng et al., 2009, Gadre et al., 2023, Gao et al., 2020, Raffel et al.,
2019, Schuhmann et al., 2022). DoReMi is a principled data-centric method that aims to improve
language model training efficiency. We hope that DoReMi can provide a starting point for a general
data-centric framework for language modeling via robust optimization.

6 Discussion and Limitations

Saving compute in DoReMi with extrapolation.
In Section 2, we run DoReMi for the number of
training steps that will be used to train the final model, which could be unnecessarily expensive.
A future direction for saving compute would be to stop running DoReMi at an early step and
extrapolate the domain weights for the desired number of steps, since we found that most of the
variation in the domain weights during a DoReMi run seems to occur in the beginning of training
(Appendix Figure 8).

Choice of reference model. The choice of reference model can affect the domain weights found
by DoReMi. For example, iterated DoReMi (Section 3) improves performance by using a reference
model trained on the tuned domain weights from a previous round of DoReMi. Further directions
include varying the reference model size and using specialized reference models to optimize domain
weights for a specific application area.

What is a domain? We define a domain by data provenance in our experiments, but this only
enables coarse-grained control. Using fine-grained domains could improve the gains from DoReMi.
For example, DoReMi is more effective on The Pile (22 domains) than the GLaM dataset (8 domains).
Open directions include automatically finding fine-grained domains (e.g., via clustering as in DRO-
LM (Oren et al., 2019)) and reweighting the data at an example level. When domains are very
fine-grained, it will be important to control the pessimism of DRO (e.g., DRO can put all the weight
on a small set of worst-case examples).

Transferability of domain weights across scales. We optimized the domain weights with a small
proxy model (280M) and directly used these domain weights to improve training at a larger scale
(8B). Understanding why the domain weights can be transferred across scales and the limits of how
far these domain weights transfer are important questions to answer in future work.

Broader impacts. Large language models are We hope to improve training efficiency and reduce
the environmental impact of training large LMs (Lacoste et al., 2019, Ligozat et al., 2021, Patterson
et al., 2021, Strubell et al., 2019). In particular, by reducing the training time by 2x, we can halve the
cost and energy consumption of training large language models. Since such efficiency improvements
may be used to develop even larger models, there may be no absolute improvement in energy
consumption. Ultimately, we hope to improve the training efficiency and cost of developing future
language models relative to existing methods.
Large LMs have also been well-documented to have risks and biases (Abid et al., 2021, Blodgett and
OConnor, 2017, Bommasani et al., 2021, Gehman et al., 2020, Nadeem et al., 2020). For example, GPT-
3 tends to have an anti-Muslim bias, where Muslims are frequently related to violence or terrorism
in analogy and completion tasks (Abid et al., 2021). As large language models are increasingly relied
upon in applications, the magnitude of the risks increases (Bommasani et al., 2022). Distributionally
robust optimization (DRO), which is used in DoReMi to optimize the data mixture, can have a

12

favorable impact on fairness (Hashimoto et al., 2018). While the standard approach of minimizing
the average loss can lead to disparate performance on minority subgroups that do not contribute
heavily to the loss (Amodei et al., 2016), DRO promotes good performance on all groups via a
worst-case loss. In this way, DRO-style data-centric methods such as DoReMi can improve the
representation disparity between majority and minority subgroups in a dataset.

7 Conclusion

We introduced DoReMi, an algorithm reweighting data domains for training language models.
DoReMi is able to run on small models and transfer the benefits to 30x larger models, resulting in a
2.6x speedup in training on the Pile just by changing the sampling probabilities on domains. We
hope to instigate more research on data-centric approaches for improving language model training
efficiency.

Acknowledgments

We thank Xiangning Chen, Andrew Dai, Zoubin Ghahramani, Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Paul
Michel, Yonghui Wu, Steven Zheng, Chen Zhu and the broader Google Bard team members for
insightful discussions and pointers.