---
paper_id: 2402.00159
source: arxiv
title: Dolma
converted_at: 2026-03-14T16:46:03.722800
note: "Content extracted before References section"
---

4
2
0
2

n
u
J

6

]
L
C
.
s
c
[

2
v
9
5
1
0
0
.
2
0
4
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Dolma : an Open Corpus of Three Trillion Tokens
for Language Model Pretraining Research

Luca Soldaini

♥ α Rodney Kinney

♥ α Akshita Bhagia

♥ α Dustin Schwenk

♥ α

David Atkinsonα Russell Authurα Ben Boginα ω Khyathi Chanduα
Jennifer Dumasα Yanai Elazarα ω Valentin Hofmannα Ananya Harsh Jhaα
Sachin Kumarα Li Lucyβ Xinxi Lyuω Nathan Lambertα Ian Magnussonα
Jacob Morrisonα Niklas Muennighoff Aakanksha Naikα Crystal Namα
Matthew E. Petersσ Abhilasha Ravichanderα Kyle Richardsonα Zejiang Shenτ
Emma Strubellχ α Nishant Subramaniχ α Oyvind Tafjordα Pete Walshα
Luke Zettlemoyerω Noah A. Smithα ω Hannaneh Hajishirziα ω
Iz Beltagyα Dirk Groeneveldα Jesse Dodgeα

Kyle Lo

♥ α

αAllen Institute for AI
σSpiffy AI

βUniversity of California, Berkeley

χCarnegie Mellon University

τ Massachusetts Institute of Technology

ωUniversity of Washington

{lucas,kylel}@allenai.org

Abstract

1

Introduction

Information about pretraining corpora used to
train the current best-performing language mod-
els is seldom discussed: commercial models
rarely detail their data, and even open mod-
els are often released without accompanying
training data or recipes to reproduce them. As
a result, it is challenging to conduct and ad-
vance scientific research on language modeling,
such as understanding how training data im-
pacts model capabilities and limitations. To
facilitate scientific research on language model
pretraining, we curate and release Dolma, a
three-trillion-token English corpus, built from
a diverse mixture of web content, scientific pa-
pers, code, public-domain books, social media,
and encyclopedic materials. We extensively
document Dolma, including its design princi-
ples, details about its construction, and a sum-
mary of its contents. We present analyses and
experimental results on intermediate states of
Dolma to share what we have learned about
important data curation practices. Finally, we
open-source our data curation toolkit to enable
reproduction of our work as well as support
further research in large-scale data curation.1

hf.co/datasets/allenai/dolma
github.com/allenai/dolma

♥

Core authors. See Appendix B for list of contributions.

Language models are now central to tackling myriad nat-
ural language processing tasks, including few-shot learn-
ing, summarization, question answering, and more. In-
creasingly, the most powerful language models are built
by a few organizations who withhold most model devel-
opment details (Anthropic, 2023; OpenAI, 2023; Anil
et al., 2023; Gemini Team et al., 2023). In particular, the
composition of language model pretraining data is often
vaguely described, even in cases where the model itself
is released for public use, such as Llama 2 (Touvron
et al., 2023b). This hinders understanding of the effects
of pretraining corpus composition on model capabilities
and limitations, with impacts on scientific progress as
well as on the public who interfaces with these models.
Our aim is to increase participation in scientific research
of language models through open corpora:

• Data transparency helps developers and users of ap-
plications that rely on language models to make more
informed decisions (Gebru et al., 2021). For example,
models have shown to perform better on tasks that
are more similar to their pretraining data (Razeghi
et al., 2022; Kandpal et al., 2023), or social biases in
models’ pretraining data may necessitate additional
consideration when using them (Feng et al., 2023;
Navigli et al., 2023; Seshadri et al., 2023).

• Open pretraining data is necessary to analyze how

1This manuscript was prepared for Dolma v.1.6. As our
work on open data for language modeling continues, we will
continue to improve Dolma. Updated versions can be found
in the provided links.

Source

Doc Type

UTF-8 bytes
(GB)

Documents
(millions)

Unicode
words
(billions)

Llama
tokens
(billions)

Common Crawl

GitHub

Reddit

Semantic Scholar

Project Gutenberg

Wikipedia, Wikibooks

(cid:128) web pages
— code
(cid:220) social media
(cid:135) papers
[ books
] encyclopedic

Total

9,812

1,043

339

268

20.4

16.2

11,519

3,734

210

377

38.8

0.056

6.2

4,367

1,928

260

72

50

4.0

3.7

2,479

411

89

70

6.0

4.3

2,318

3,059

Table 1: The Dolma corpus at-a-glance. It consists of three trillion tokens sampled from a diverse set of domains;
sourced from approximately 200 TB of raw text before curation down to an 11 TB dataset. It has been extensively
cleaned for language model pretraining use. Tokens calculated using the LLaMA tokenizer.

its composition influences model behavior, allowing
those training models to interrogate and improve cur-
rent data practices (Longpre et al., 2023; Gao, 2021;
Elazar et al., 2023). Examples of this research in-
clude memorization (Carlini et al., 2022; Chang et al.,
2023), deduplication (Lee et al., 2022), adversarial
attacks (Wallace et al., 2021), benchmark contamina-
tion (Magar and Schwartz, 2022), and training data
attribution (Hammoudeh and Lowd, 2022; Grosse
et al., 2023).

To support broader participation and inquiry in these
lines of research, we present Data for Open Language
Models’ Appetite (Dolma), an open corpus of three
trillion tokens designed to support language model pre-
training research. We source much of our data from
sources similar to those present in past work, including
a mix of web text from Common Crawl, scientific re-
search from Semantic Scholar, code from GitHub, pub-
lic domain books, social media posts from Reddit, and
encyclopedic materials from Wikipedia. Compared to
other publicly-available pretraining corpora, Dolma of-
fers a larger pool of tokens at comparable quality while
maintaining diverse data composition. In summary, our
contributions are two-fold:

• We release the Dolma Corpus, a diverse, multi-
source collection of 3T tokens1 across over 4B doc-
uments acquired from 6 different data sources that
are (i) commonly seen in large-scale language model
pretraining and (ii) made accessible to the general
public. Table 1 provides a high-level overview of the
amount of data from each source.

• We open source the Dolma Toolkit, a high-
performance, portable tool designed to efficiently cu-
rate large datasets for language model pretraining.
Through this toolkit, practitioners can not only re-

1We follow the definition of “token” as a subword obtained
using a tokenizer (such as LLaMA’s or GPT-NeoX’s), which
is distinct from “word”, as in a unit of text as defined by the
Unicode text segmentation standard.

produce our dataset, but also study and improve data
curation practices.

2 Related Work

Closed data curation practices in language model
pretraining research. Pretraining data practices for
language model research have grown increasingly
closed, both with respect to access to data as well as
documentation of key details about the data itself or
its curation practices that would enable reproduction
efforts or further scientific study. Proprietary models
(e.g., GPT-4, OpenAI, 2023; PaLM 2, Anil et al., 2023;
Claude, Anthropic, 2023) disclose little to no informa-
tion (not even corpus size, or data provenance), and do
not share data artifacts. Despite increasing access to
powerful open models, few are released alongside their
training data; exceptions include T5 on C4 (Raffel et al.,
2020), BLOOM (Leong et al., 2022) on ROOTS (Piktus
et al., 2023), GPT-J (Wang and Komatsuzaki, 2021),
GPT-NeoX (Black et al., 2022), Pythia (Biderman et al.,
2023) on Pile (Gao et al., 2020), and INCITE (Together
Computer, 2023c) on RedPajama v1 (Together Com-
puter, 2023a). The most powerful open models (e.g.,
Llama 2 (Touvron et al., 2023b), Mistral (Jiang et al.,
2023), Yi (Bai et al., 2023), Qwen (01.AI, 2023)) do
not share their data nor provide sufficient details for
reproduction. Among large-scale language model pre-
training efforts, the ones accompanied with transparent
data curation documentation include LLaMA (Touvron
et al., 2023a) (released model, unreleased data), Go-
pher (Rae et al., 2021) (unreleased model and data),
and Falcon (Almazrouei et al., 2023) (released model,
released partial data). Appendix §C further illustrates
the many unknowns of data curation practices of open
and closed models, as well as recent trends away from
open data practices that have motivated our work.

Open corpora for language model pretraining. We
recognize prior efforts to curate, document, and release
open corpora to support language model pretraining

research. However, limitations in these prior corpora
have motivated us to curate a new dataset:

• C4 (Raffel et al., 2020) (175B tokens) and Pile (Gao
et al., 2020) (387B tokens) are high-quality datasets
with demonstrated use in training language models,
but are unfortunately limited in scale. ROOTS (Pik-
tus et al., 2023) is large (≈400B tokens) but given its
multilingual focus, its English-only portion is only
30% of the dataset and thus contributes too few to-
kens to train English-only models. We recognize that
scale and English-only concentration do not imply
a “higher-quality” dataset; rather, certain threads of
research necessitate these foci, motivating our new
corpus (see §3).

• While Falcon (Almazrouei et al., 2023) (580B tokens)
and RedPajama v2 (Together Computer, 2023b) (30T
tokens) meet our scale criterion, they are entirely de-
rived from Common Crawl web pages, and thus lack
source diversity commonly targeted when curating
data for the largest language models (e.g., scientific
papers, code). We also note that RedPajama v2 is
only lightly-curated, distributing content output by
CCNet (Wenzek et al., 2020) mostly as-is, thus plac-
ing the onus on model developers to decide their own
filtering before training.

• RedPajama v1 (Together Computer, 2023a) (≈1.2T
tokens) is most similar to our effort and a source of in-
spiration when designing Dolma. While RedPajama
v1 was a specific reproduction of the LLaMA (Tou-
vron et al., 2023a) training data, we have a broader
reproduction target which required diving into data
sources that RedPajama v1 did not pursue, includ-
ing larger collections of scientific papers and social
media forums like Reddit (see § 3). Further, recent
work has identified data quality issues suggesting
significant additional cleanup of RedPajama v1 is
recommended before costly language model train-
ing (Soboleva et al., 2023; Elazar et al., 2023).

While this manuscript was under review, several other
open corpora for language modeling have been re-
including FineWeb (Penedo et al., 2024),
leased,
Zyda (Tokpanov et al., 2024), and the datasets used
to train LLM360 Amber (Liu et al., 2023), LLM360
K2 (LLM360 Team, 2024), and MAP-Neo (Zhang et al.,
2024) models.

3 Data Design Goals

We present the design goals of Dolma and discuss how
these goals guided our decision-making during data cu-
ration. In sharing these, we hope to inform users of
Dolma’s strengths and limitations while also reinforcing
practice around such disclosures in dataset curation re-
search (see curation rationales in Bender and Friedman
(2018) and motivation questions in Gebru et al. (2021)).

Be consistent with prior language model pretrain-
ing recipes. By matching data sources and methods

used to create other language modeling corpora, to the
extent they are known, we enable the broader research
community to use our artifacts to study (and scrutinize)
language models being developed today, even those
developed behind closed doors. In this reproduction
effort, we follow established practices to the extent they
are known. Notably, this also means scoping Dolma
to English-only text to better leverage known curation
practices and maximize generalizability of scientific
work on Dolma to existing language models.2

When in doubt, make evidence-backed decisions.
Still, there remain myriad data curation decisions for
which there is no single clear recipe from prior work,
both when best practice isn’t known as well as when
implementations differ in subtle ways. In such cases,
we prioritize decisions that maximize performance of
language models trained on Dolma over a diverse suite
of tasks and datasets (see §4.2).

Large scale data to train large models. Hoffmann
et al. (2022) suggested that one can train compute-
optimal models by maintaining a fixed ratio between
language model size (in parameters) and a minimum
number of training tokens. Recent works that follow
these “scaling laws,” such as Llama 2, show that there is
still room for performance improvement by increasing
the number of training tokens. We aim for a sufficiently
large corpus—2–3T tokens—to allow further study of
the relationship between model and dataset size.

Make necessary adjustments to preserve openness.
A core tenet of our work is openness, which we define to
mean (i) sharing the data itself and (ii) documenting
the process to curate it. This requirement means we
occasionally must deviate from known recipes due to
additional practical, legal or ethical considerations that
arise when pursuing dataset research in the open. For
example, despite their use in training language models
like LLaMA, we avoid sources like Books3 (Gao et al.,
2020) which are the center of ongoing legal cases around
AI use of copyrighted materials (Knibbs, 2023). Simi-
larly, despite the lack of discussion around the removal
of personally identifiable information in prior recipes,
we perform this filtering to mitigate risks associated
with data release (Subramani et al., 2023).

4 Data Curation Methodology

4.1 The Dolma Toolkit

Pretraining data curation requires defining complex
pipelines that transform raw data from multiple sources
into a single collection of cleaned, plain text docu-
ments (Wenzek et al., 2020; Almazrouei et al., 2023).
To curate Dolma, we create and open-source a high-
performance toolkit to facilitate efficient processing on

2Recognizing that this focus reinforces the assumption of
English as the “default” language, we hope to expand Dolma
to more languages in the future. We release our data curation
tools to support such efforts.

hundreds of terabytes of text content. Our toolkit uni-
fies common dataset curation steps into “filtering” and
“mixing” operations:

Zfiltering We unify common data transformations
like language, quality or content filters into a single im-
plementation. Given a configuration—a text unit (e.g.,
document, paragraph,3 sentence, etc.), a scoring method
(e.g., linear classifier, language model perplexity, reg-
ular expression matches), and a removal policy (e.g.,
delete, replace with string)—our toolkit parallelizes fil-
tering operations by identifying and removing undesir-
able text at massive scale. For Dolma, we use these to
filter non-English, “low quality” or unnatural,4 toxic-
ity,5 and PII at the document and sub-document levels.
In internal tests to replicate C4 recipe, our toolkit per-
formed filtering at a rate of 122 CPU hours per TB; for
reference, processing the full “raw” Dolma files totaling
200 TB on a c6a.48xlarge instance with 192 vCPUs
would take 5 days.

(cid:231) mixing We unify common cross-file operations,
like up/down-sampling, deduplication and decontami-
nation, into a single Rust module that “mixes” content
across files into a smaller set of files. For example, we
can achieve up-sampling by repeatedly reading the same
file paths when mixing. We also implement a Bloom
filter (Bloom, 1970) compatible with our mixer which
enables linear-time probabilistic detection of duplicates.
We can repurpose this for test set decontamination by
first seeding the Bloom filter with test examples, then
flagging any detected duplicates when mixing the pre-
training data.

4.2 Data Ablations

To help us make informed decisions, we conduct data
ablations in which we train language models on a
dataset following a specific data curation decision, or
intervention, and evaluate the resulting model’s perfor-
mance on a range of test datasets against a baseline
dataset. By comparing intervention and baseline results
while controlling for model architecture and training,
we can isolate the impact of specific dataset curation
decisions on downstream models.

3We define a paragraph to be a span of text ending in a

newline UTF-8 character “\n”.

4The term “quality filter,” while widely used in literature,
does not appropriately describe the outcome of filtering a
dataset. Quality might be perceived as a comment on the
informativeness, comprehensiveness, or other characteristics
valued by humans. However, the filters used in Dolma and
other language models efforts select text according to criteria
that are inherently ideological (Gururangan et al., 2022).

5Similar to “quality”, there is no single definition for “toxi-
city”. Rather, specific definitions vary depending on task (Vid-
gen and Derczynski, 2020) and dataset curators’ social iden-
tities (Santy et al., 2023); annotators’ beliefs also influence
toxic language detection (Sap et al., 2021). Predicting toxi-
city remains challenging (Welbl et al., 2021; Markov et al.,
2023), especially as existing methods have been shown to
discriminate against minoritized groups (Xu et al., 2021).

Model training. We conduct data ablations using
a 1.2 billion parameter decoder-only model from the
OLMo family of open language models (Groeneveld
et al., 2024). This is in line with similar model sizes
that have been used for ablations in prior work (Le Scao
et al., 2022). As training such models to completion
is prohibitively expensive, especially when one must
perform these experiments for each significant data cu-
ration decision, we only train these models up to 150
billion tokens before terminating them early. Further
details of our training setup in Appendix D.1.

Tasks and test datasets. To select our evaluation tasks
and datasets, we prioritize those that (i) have been used
in prior language model pretraining evaluation, (ii) cap-
ture a diverse range of language model knowledge and
capabilities, and (iii) for which we can avoid test set
contamination (Dodge et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2023).
We arrive at 8 datasets in our evaluation suite (full
details in Appendix §D) that have been used in prior
language modeling research (e.g., LLaMA, Llama 2,
etc.) and capture a range of capabilities (e.g., question
answering, commonsense reasoning, etc.). Full test set
contamination analysis validating our dataset choices in
Appendix §L.

Evaluation. We perform evaluation of our data ab-
lation models using zero-shot in-context prompting,
casting every task as (ranked) text classification, fol-
lowing in-context prompt truncation from Min et al.
(2022), prompts from PromptSource (Bach et al., 2022),
and using an in-house evaluation harness similar to the
Eleuther harness (Gao et al., 2023).

5 (cid:128) Curating Dolma-Web

In this section, we describe the web subset of Dolma,
which consists of 2.28T tokens derived from Common
Crawl,6 a collection of over 250 billion pages that were
crawled since 2007. Common Crawl is organized in
snapshots, each corresponding to a full crawl over its
seed URLs; as of Feb 2024, there are 97 snapshots. We
used 25 snapshots between 2020-05 to 2023-06.7

5.1 (cid:19) Acquisition & Z Language Filtering

Our web pipeline leverages CCNet (Wenzek et al., 2020)
to perform language filtering and initial content dedupli-
cation. CCNet has been used to develop other language
model datasets like that for LLaMA, RedPajama v1,
RedPajama v2. CCNet processes each web page with
a FastText (Joulin et al., 2016a) language ID model8 to
determine the primary language for each document; we
keep all pages with English document score greater than
or equal to 0.5 (removed 61.7% of the data, by byte size).

6commoncrawl.org
7To minimize storage and compute costs, we only acquired
enough shards of Common Crawl to meet our target 2-3T
token corpus size, assuming at least a 10x reduction from the
sum of all data cleaning efforts, including CCNet (§3).

8fasttext.cc/docs/en/language-identification

Further, CCNet identifies and removes very common
paragraphs by grouping shards in each snapshot into
small sets and removing duplicated paragraphs in each.
This step removed approximately 70% of paragraphs,
primarily consisting of headers and navigation elements.
Overall, CCNet pipeline filters out 84.2% of the content
in Common Crawl, from 175.1 TB to 27.7 TB. More
details are provided in our Datasheet §N.

5.2 Z Quality Filtering

Web crawled data requires significant cleanup before
language model training; undesirable content ranges
from artifacts introduced by HTML to plain text con-
version (e.g., page headers, ill-formatted text) to pages
lacking “prose-like” content (e.g., boilerplate text, short
segments). Per arguments posed in Rae et al. (2021)
and Almazrouei et al. (2023) against model-based qual-
ity filters, we approach quality filtering by combining
heuristics introduced by Gopher and C4. Specifically,
we keep all the Gopher rules (Gopher All) and keep a
single heuristic from C4 designed to remove paragraphs
that do not end in punctuation (C4 NoPunc), as opposed
to adopting the full set of C4 rules (C4 All). Implemen-
tation details of all filtering rules are provided in our
Datasheet §N.

ciated with higher quality. To our surprise, we found our
heuristic filtering rules did not affect these proportions,
suggesting that such model-based quality filters may
capture other signals orthogonal to heuristic filters.

5.3 Z Content Filtering

Filtering Toxic Content Data sampled from the web
often contains harmful or toxic content (Matic et al.,
2020; Luccioni and Viviano, 2021; Birhane et al.,
2023a,b). Such content is often filtered to minimize the
likelihood that downstream language models are prone
to toxic content generation (Anil et al., 2023; Rae et al.,
2021; Thoppilan et al., 2022; Hoffmann et al., 2022;
Longpre et al., 2023). To remove this content from
Dolma, we train our own FastText classifiers on the
Jigsaw Toxic Comments (cjadams et al., 2017) dataset,
producing two models that identify “hate” and “NSFW”
content, respectively. See Appendix §H for implementa-
tion details. We run these classifiers on Common Crawl
sentences9 and remove any sentence scored above a set
threshold.

Figure 1: We find a positive effect of web data quality
filters on 1.2B model performance, evaluated across
training iterations, over a no-filtering baseline. We only
show results on HellaSwag here; all figures for other
evaluation datasets are in the Appendix §O.

Ablation results shown in §1 validate our filtering
strategy: we find that C4 NoPunc on its own outper-
forms both C4 All as well as Gopher All on both
perplexity and downstream tasks. Finally, combining
Gopher All + C4 NoPunc offers the best performance.
In all, Gopher All tagged 15.23% of UTF-8 charac-
ters for removal, while C4 NoPunc tagged 22.73% of
characters for removal.

Model and heuristic filters are orthogonal. CCNet
also provides quality scores using KenLM (Heafield,
2011) perplexity that groups documents based on
Wikipedia-likeness; these buckets are often interpreted
as high (21.9%), medium (28.5%), or low (49.6%) qual-
ity content, in which more Wikipedia-like is often asso-

Figure 2: We find a positive effect of web data content
filters on 1.2B model performance, evaluated across
training iterations, over a no-filtering baseline. We only
show results on HellaSwag here; all figures for other
evaluation datasets are in the Appendix §O.

To understand filter thresholding effects on Dolma,
we conduct a data ablation choosing two very different
thresholds for these content filters (§2). We find the
“High Threshold” (τ = 0.4) removes less content (5.5–
7.3%), but generally yields lower downstream perfor-
mance than the “Low Threshold” (τ = 0.0004) which
removes more content (29.1–34.9%).10

Weighing the tradeoff between dataset scale (“High”)
and performance maximization (“Low”), we adopt the
more permissive “High” threshold to ensure we meet our
minimum token count requirement. The cause of this
was surprising: Our quality, content, and deduplication
filters overlap very little in which texts they remove

9Using BlingFire sentence splitter (Microsoft, 2019).
10Manual inspection of the distribution of sentence scores
revealed a bi-modal distribution with peaks near 0.0 and 1.0
(e.g., Figure 8). As such, we chose “Low” to remove even
slightly toxic data (> 0.0), and “High” to limit our max data
removal amount to preserve our target dataset scale.

050B100B0.30.350.40.450.5BaselineC4 NoPuncC4 AllGopher AllC4 NoPunc + Gopher AllHellaSwagTotal TokensAccuracy050B100B0.30.350.40.450.5Hate Filter (Low Threshold)NSFW Filter (Low Threshold)Hate Filter (High Threshold)NSFW Filter (High Threshold)BaselineHellaSwagTotal TokensAccuracy(Figure 9), resulting in a compounded filtering effect
when combining them. In future versions of Dolma, we
will start with more shards of Common Crawl and adopt
stricter filter thresholds.

Filtering Personally Identifiable Information Data
sampled from the web can also leak personally identifi-
able information (PII) of users (Luccioni and Viviano,
2021; Subramani et al., 2023). Traces of PII are abun-
dant in large-scale datasets (Elazar et al., 2023), and lan-
guage models have also been shown to reproduce PII at
inference time (Carlini et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023b).
Dolma’s size makes it impractical to use model-based
PII detectors like Presidio (Microsoft, 2018); instead,
we rely on carefully-crafted regular expressions that sac-
rifice some accuracy for significant speed-up. Following
Subramani et al. (2023), we focus on three kinds of PII
that are detectable with high precision: email addresses,
IP addresses and phone numbers. For documents with 5
or fewer PII spans, we replace the span with a special
token (e.g., |||EMAIL_ADDRESS|||); this affects 0.02% of
documents. Otherwise, we remove entire documents
with higher density of PII spans; this affects 0.001%
of documents. In data ablation experiments, we find
that execution details around PII (e.g., removal versus
special token replacement) had no effect on model per-
formance, which is expected given the tiny percentage
of affected data. See Appendix §I for implementation
details; all figures for results on evaluation suite are in
the Appendix §O.

5.4 (cid:231) Deduplication

Deduplication of pretraining data has been shown to be
effective for improving token efficiency during model
training (Lee et al., 2022; Abbas et al., 2023; Tirumala
et al., 2023); as such, it has become common practice
among pretraining data recipes. In Dolma, we perform
three stages of deduplication:

(i) Exact URL dedup filters 53.2% of documents.

(ii) Exact document dedup filters 14.9% of URL-
deduped documents, including empty documents.

(iii) Exact paragraph dedup filters 18.7% of para-
graphs from the URL-deduped documents, includ-
ing empty paragraphs.

This multi-stage approach is designed to increase ef-
ficiency: Stage (i) is commonly used first thanks to its
computational efficiency (Agarwal et al., 2009; Koppula
et al., 2010; Penedo et al., 2023). Stages (i) and (ii) are
designed to remove copies of the same item, such as
re-crawls of the same URL and identical pages with
multiple URLs (e.g., same news article in multiple on-
line newspapers). Performing these early before any
content or quality filtering greatly reduces the number
of documents to process. In contrast, Stage (iii) removes
common boilerplate content (e.g., the byline under all
articles by the same author); as paragraph removal risks
disrupting content analysis, we perform it last. We per-
form all three stages using the Bloom filter in §4.1.

5.5 (cid:19)Z(cid:231) Putting It All Together

To summarize, the Dolma web pipeline transforms the
output of CCNet through URL and document-level
deduplication, then quality and content filtering, and
finally paragraph-level deduplication.

Figure 3: We find a positive compounding effect on
1.2B model performance, evaluated across training iter-
ations, when stacking quality filtering, content filtering
and paragraph-level deduplication, over a no-filtering
baseline. We show results on HellaSwag here; all figures
for other evaluation datasets are in the Appendix §O.

We show the positive compounding effect of all stages
of our web pipeline on downstream model performance,
as assessed through our data ablations §4.2. We present
summary statistics in Appendix §K.

6 — Curating Dolma-Code

In this section, we describe the code subset of Dolma,
which consists of 411B tokens derived from GitHub.

6.1 (cid:19) Acquisition & Z Language Filtering

Like prior work in code language models (e.g., Star-
Coder (Li et al., 2023b)), we also acquire code through
the Stack (Kocetkov et al., 2022), a deduplicated but
otherwise unfiltered collection of permissively-licensed
GitHub repositories. The raw version of this dataset was
collected in March 2023. We filter data-heavy files with
extensions such as JSON and CSV.

6.2 Z Quality Filtering

We apply heuristics derived from the code subset of Red-
Pajama v1 and StarCoder. RedPajama v1 uses rules to
remove repetitive file preambles, such as license state-
ments and documents with excessively long lines or
mostly numerical content. Overall, RedPajama v1 is
removes files that are mostly data or generated through
templates. To select high-quality code snippets, we also
use rules from the StarCoder pipeline; these heuristics
filter GitHub repositories with no to few stars, files with
too few or too many comments, and HTML files with
low code-to-text ratio. Implementation details of all
filtering rules are provided in our Datasheet §N.

When conducting data ablations, we find that, com-
pared to RedPajama v1 rules alone, RedPajama v1 and

050B100B0.30.40.5BaselineQuality FiltersQuality Filters + DedupQuality Filters + Dedup + Content FiltersHellaSwagTotal TokensAccuracyStarCoder rules combined lead to lower perplexity on
code datasets (e.g., HumanEval; Chen et al., 2021) and
improved performance on datasets in our evaluation
suite.11 Therefore, we chose to use this combination of
the two filtering rules for this Dolma code subset.

6.3 Z Content Filtering

We apply the same heuristics to filter and mask PII used
in the web subset (§5). Additionally, we filter any doc-
uments containing code secrets and software-specific
personal information by running the detect-secrets
library (Yelp, 2013) and removing any documents with
a match.

6.4 (cid:231) Deduplication

We started from the already-deduplicated version of the
Stack, which used the pipeline first introduced by Allal
et al. (2023), which uses MinHash (Broder, 2002) and
Locally Sensitive Hashing to find similar documents.

7 (cid:220) Curating Dolma-Social

In this section, we describe the social media subset
of Dolma, which consists of 80B tokens derived from
Reddit data.

7.1 (cid:19) Acquisition & Z Language Filtering

We derive this subset from 378M posts from Decem-
ber 2005 until March 2023 obtained through Pushshift
(Baumgartner et al., 2020). We include both submis-
sions—initial message in conversations on Reddit—and
comments—replies to messages. The tree-like structure
of Reddit threads allows for multiple possible data for-
mats depending on how the various components of a
thread are linearized for language model pretraining.
To better inform this transformation, we conduct a data
ablation over several approaches:

1. Atomic Content. Treats all comments and submis-

sionas independent documents.

Figure 4: Experimenting with different Reddit thread
linearization methods with 1.2B models, evaluated
across training iterations. We only show results on Hel-
laSwag here; all figures for other evaluation datasets are
in the Appendix §O.

7.2 Z Quality Filtering

Like web crawled data, social media posts also require
significant cleanup before language model training. We
repurpose the pipeline introduced by Henderson et al.
(2019) to filter submissions and comments. We remove
comments shorter than 500 characters, and submissions
shorter than 400 characters.12 We also remove docu-
ments over 40,000 characters.

We remove comments with fewer than 3 votes13, as
lower scores are more likely for comments that are
deeply nested in a conversational thread (Weninger
et al., 2013) or content that is more likely to results
in emotionally-charged discourse (Davis and Graham,
2021). Votes have been used as a signal in construct-
ing the WebText (Radford et al., 2019) and OpenWeb-
Text (Peterson, 2020) corpora. We discard documents
that have been deleted by their authors, removed by
moderators, or labeled by their authors as “over 18”.
We exclude any document originated from a set 26,123
banned or NSFW subreddits.14

7.3 Z Content Filtering

2. Partial Threads. Comments from the same thread
combined into a multi-round dialogue between
users. Submissions as separate documents.

We apply the same content filtering in §5.3, except due
to the short length of many Reddit documents, instead
of masking PII, we fully remove the document.

3. Full Threads. Combines submissions with all

7.4 (cid:231) Deduplication

child comments into one document.

See Appendix §E for implementation details. From
results in Figure 4, we see treating submissions and
comments as independent documents (Atomic Content)
leads to better performance on our evaluation suite. We
hypothesize that artificial formatting introduced when
combining thread elements negatively impacts language
model training; we leave further investigation to future
work. Finally, we filter non-English content using the
approach from §5.1.

11All figures for results on evaluation suite in Appendix §O.

We employ the same strategy used in the web
pipeline (§5.4). Since submissions and comments are
shorter than web documents, we only deduplicate at a

12Qualitative inspection of the data suggested that submis-
sions are of higher quality than comments; thus, we use a
more permissive minimum length.

13The total votes for each document are obtained by com-
puting the difference between positive votes, also known as
“upvotes”, negative votes or “downvotes”.

14Available on GitHub as part of Dolma Toolkit (see
subreddit_blocklist.txt) . The list was curated by merg-
ing several sources that tracked banned subreddits. We also
include any subreddit with over 10% of posts tagged as NSFW.

020B40B60B0.30.350.40.450.5Atomic Content, Dedup, PII, ToxicAtomic ContentPartial Threads, DedupComplete ThreadsPartial ThreadsHellaSwagTotal TokensAccuracydocument-level. This strategy is useful to reduce the
incidence of “copypasta” (identical text repeated across
comments and subreddits for comedic effect) and other
repetitive information.

8 Assembling Other Data Sources

In this section, we briefly summarize additional high-
quality sources that were used to derive Dolma. More
details on collection and processing in Datasheet §N.

(cid:128) C4 for Curated Web Content Similar to data
recipes for LLaMA and Llama 2, we supplement our
web subset with C4 (Raffel et al., 2020). We further
refine this data by reprocessing it through our full web
pipeline (excluding URL deduplication) (§5) which re-
moved additional content, including more low-quality
and duplicated texts, and performed PII masking.

(cid:135) Semantic Scholar for Academic Literature The
peS2o dataset (Soldaini and Lo, 2023) is a collection
of approximately 40 million open-access academic pa-
pers that have been cleaned, filtered, deduplicated, and
It is de-
formatted for pretraining language models.
rived from the Semantic Scholar Open Research Corpus
(S2ORC; Lo et al., 2020). As this dataset has been
created for language modeling purposes, we use it as-is.

[ Project Gutenberg for Books Project Gutenberg
is a repository of over 70 thousand public domain books.
We collected Project Gutenberg’s archive in April 2023.
We use English language books, which we filter using
the same approach described in §5.1. We deduplicate
this dataset based on book title exact match.

] Wikipedia and Wikibooks for Encyclopedic Con-
tent This dataset was derived by March 2023 Wikime-
dia dumps. We use the “English” and “Simple” editions
of Wikipedia and Wikibooks as base for the Encyclo-
pedic subset of Dolma. Sources were processed using
WikiExtractor(Attardi, 2023). We remove any document
with 25 or fewer UTF-8-segmented words, as we found
shorter pages to either be the result of short, templated
pages (e.g., pages containing only a few words and an
information box) or XML parsing errors. By design,
this dataset does not contain duplicated documents.

9 Training a Language Model on Dolma

As a final validation step of the Dolma pipeline, we
train, evaluate and release a decoder-only, autoregres-
sive language model which we call OLMo-1B. We present
zero-shot experimental results of OLMo-1B on a range of
downstream tasks demonstrating comparable quality to
other released language models of comparable size.

9.1 Evaluating OLMo-1B

In Table 2 we compare OLMo-1B with other 1B mod-
els. We note that, while all models share a roughly
comparable number of parameters, only TinyLlama
was trained on roughly the same number of tokens as
OLMo-1B. Pythia was trained on nearly 10 times fewer

M2
L
B)
ble
(1.6
Sta

63.7
43.8
76.6
68.2
45.8
74.0
94.7
64.9

66.5

P

ythia
B)
(1.1
50.2
33.1
61.8
44.7
37.8
69.1
86.0
53.3

54.5

a
m
Lla
B)
y
(1.1
Tin

B
1
-
o
M
L
O

B)
(1.2

53.2
34.8
64.6
58.7
43.6
71.1
90.5
58.9

59.4

58.1
34.5
60.7
62.5
46.4
73.7
88.1
58.9

60.3

Task

ARC-E
ARC-C
BoolQ
HellaSwag
OpenBookQA
PIQA
SciQ
WinoGrande

Average

Table 2: Comparison of OLMo-1B and other similarly-
sized language models on our evaluation suite.

tokens and StableLM2 was trained on 2 trillion tokens
for two epochs (data composition not shared). Neverthe-
less, we find that OLMo-1B performs better on average
than the most comparable model, TinyLlama, outper-
forming it in 4 out of 8 tasks from our evaluation suite
§4.2. Though zero-shot evaluations of such tasks are
often challenging for smaller 1B models, we see that
performance across all tasks and models is above naive
random performance.

9.2 Measuring Domain Fit

In §3, we motivated our decision in curating Dolma to
cover a diverse set of sources. In this section, we use
OLMo-1B to assess Dolma’s distribution of documents
leads to pretrained language models that fit well to di-
verse textual domains, compared to training on other
open corpora. To represent diverse domains, we use
Paloma (Magnusson et al., 2023), a stratified collection
of hundreds of fine-grained textual sources; thus, train-
ing on more diverse datasets should result in models
with lower overall perplexity on Paloma. We repeat
our data ablation methodology, training 1.2B models on
150B token samples from C4, mC4 (English-only) (Xue
et al., 2020), RedPajama v1, RefinedWeb (Almazrouei
et al., 2023), Pile, and Dolma.

From the results in Figure 5, we observe the follow-
ing: (1) The model trained on Pile performs well as it
is comprised of many diverse sources, despite its over-
all smaller scale. (2) Larger multi-source datasets like
Dolma and, to a lesser extent, RedPajama v1 yield mod-
els with similar coverage of diverse domains to Pile.
(3) Finally, training on single-source corpora like C4,
mC4 (English-only), and RefinedWeb leads to models
with poor fit to diverse domains as indicated by higher
average perplexity.

Our controlled perplexity analysis reveals the impor-
tance of including non-web data from diverse curated
sources. The metric that we use from Paloma surfaces
how models fit more heterogeneous data, because it sam-
ples marked domains from each source equally rather

Limitations

English-only corpus. Dolma was curated to contain
English data. As tools for language identification may
have false negatives, Dolma might contain a small per-
centage of non-English data. Traces of non-English data
are unlikely to lead to any meaningful downstream per-
formance on non-English tasks for any model trained
on Dolma. Thus, Dolma reinforces the expectation of
English being the “default” language for NLP.

Representativeness of sources in Dolma. As men-
tioned in §3, it is impossible to curate a corpus that
is representative of all language model data curation
practices. Further, many open and close language mod-
els are trained on content that cannot be acquired or
redistributed, and thus could not be included in Dolma.

Single model configuration for ablations. The ex-
perimental setup we use to validate our data curation
pipeline only covers a subset of model types used to
create language models. For example, while many lan-
guage models are in the 7 billion to 70 billion parameters
range, we train 1 billion parameter models; further, we
did not investigate the use of any alternative architec-
tures to dense auto-regressive transformer models. This
choice was dictated by the need to efficiently iterate over
many possible configurations, but it might result in de-
sign decisions that are not relevant at larger model sizes.
We expect downstream model developers to scrutinize
Dolma before using it to train their language models,
similar to the process we sketch in §9.

Limited tasks in evaluation suite. As detailed in
§4.2, we select tasks that have been used to evaluate
previous base language models, and that are not present
in our training data (i.e., Dolma is not contaminated
against them). As such, we can only assess a subset of
tasks language models are routinely used for. For exam-
ple, the effect of adding code to pretraining data cannot
be fully measured until models are able to generate exe-
cutable code; such capability is typically observed only
after models are finetuned to follow instructions (Muen-
nighoff et al., 2023a; Zhuo et al., 2024).

Manual inspection and evaluation of Dolma is in-
feasible. Given the corpus size, it is impossible to
fully inspect Dolma to assess its content. While
tools like WIMBD (Elazar et al., 2023) and Data Por-
traits (Marone and Durme, 2023) aid programmatic in-
spection of subsets of data, they cannot provide an as-
sessment of all documents in a corpus. As such, we
cannot fully describe the properties of Dolma in terms
of data distribution, content quality, and potential harms
due to the inclusion or exclusion of particular content.

Ethical Considerations

Minimize risk of harm to individuals during data
curation. Curating a pretraining corpus may intro-
duce risk to individuals, either by facilitating access

Figure 5: 1.2B parameter language models trained on
150B tokens from Dolma and other open corpora, evalu-
ated across training iterations on perplexity over diverse
domains in Paloma (Magnusson et al., 2023).

than by their unequal proportions in the source. Intu-
itively, the model trained on the Pile is well-fit to such
data as that pretraining corpus is mostly sourced from
similar smaller, hand-picked sources. But as we wish to
scale the total number of tokens in a corpus, the chal-
lenge becomes how to integrate more available web data
without losing sample efficiency on diverse evaluations
such as Paloma. In this case, we see that OLMo-1B nearly
matches the perplexity curve of the Pile model despite a
much larger fraction of web data included.

Conclusion

In this manuscript, we introduce Dolma, a three trillion
token English corpus for language model pretraining.
The Dolma corpus is comprised of a diverse set of con-
tent, including web documents, scientific papers, code,
public-domain books, social media, and encyclopedic
materials. Building off a list of explicit desiderata, we
document our data curation pipelines, providing exper-
imental results that support our decisions. We freely
release Dolma and open-source all tools we used to
curate this dataset as part of the OLMo project (Groen-
eveld et al., 2024). Since the time of writing, we have
made improvements to Dolma and have continued to
make releases; for example, our follow-on release of
Dolma v.1.7 yields significant performance improve-
ment on downstream tasks, holding the model con-
stant.15 We hope this line of work can promote trans-
parency, reproducibility, and further research in the field
of language modeling, as well as address the current
gap in the availability of pretraining data of commercial
and open language models. We release Dolma under
ODC-By and our toolkit under Apache 2.0.

15medium.com/p/92b43f7d269d

2065150Tokens Seen (billions)1314151617192022242528Perplexity1B ModelsPileRefinedWeb Dolma C4RedPajamamC4to information that is present in the corpus, or by en-
abling training of harmful models that disclose personal
information (Carlini et al., 2020) or produce toxic con-
tent (Gehman et al., 2020; Ngo et al., 2021). To mini-
mize these risks while meeting our stated goals, we en-
gaged with legal and ethics experts early in the project
and evaluated data design decisions based on their feed-
back on a case-by-case basis. Broadly, we follow ac-
cepted practices when available (e.g., masking of certain
personal identifiable information), and take a measured
approach when diverging opinions exist in the literature
(e.g., most effective approach to identify and remove
toxic content). Further, we will provide tools to request
data removal16 We believe in compromising on desired
research artifact properties like model reproducibility,
performance, and extensibility in cases of significant
harm to individuals.

Besides a risk-based approach, alternative frame-
works for considering the ethical implications of lan-
guage model data have also been proposed. Data stew-
ardship (Jernite et al., 2022) seeks to create a framework
to collect and reflect explicit interests of data owners.
Data trusts (Chan et al., 2023) or data licensing (Li et al.,
2023a) can also enable explicit consent in sharing data
for AI training. As no current state-of-the-art model
is trained on data collected through these frameworks,
these approaches would limit the representativeness goal
stated in §3. As these principles are adopted, we will
consider them for future versions of Dolma.

Copyright and fair use considerations. At the time
of writing, the landscape governing applicability of
copyright law and fair use doctrine (also known as
“fair dealing”) and language models is largely unde-
termined (Cooper et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2024). In
the United States, legal scholars and practitioners have
suggested that training models on copyright content
might constitute fair use (Balasubramaniam et al., 2023;
MacKie-Mason and Li, 2023; Henderson et al., 2023),
while also recognizing limitations of existing doctrine
in this application (Farhadi et al., 2023). Further, le-
gal assessments regarding the use of copyrighted data
in language models vary widely depending on jurisdic-
tion: in early 2024, Israel (Israel Ministry of Justice,
2022) and Japan (Technomancers.ai, 2023) allow copy-
righted content to be used for AI training data, although
the latter is currently re-considering this framework.
While most datasets we used were curated with copy-
right and licensing in mind (e.g., open access papers in
peS2o (Soldaini and Lo, 2023), open source repositories
in the Stack (Kocetkov et al., 2022)) or were already
permissively licensed (e.g., Wikipedia is released un-
der a Creative Commons license), we recognize that
large web crawls may also contain copyrighted material.
Yet, given current tools, it’s not possible to reliably or
scalably detect copyrighted materials in a corpus of this
size. Our decision to curate and distribute Dolma fac-

16Available at forms.gle/FzpUXLJhE57JLJ3f8

tors in several considerations, including that all our data
sources were publicly available and already being used
in large-scale language model pretraining (both open
and closed). We recognize that the legal landscape of
AI is changing rapidly, especially as it pertains to use of
copyrighted materials for training models.