---
paper_id: 2410.04209
source: arxiv
title: Equivariant NFNs for Transformers
converted_at: 2026-05-20T23:15:29.575092
note: "Content extracted before References section"
---

5
2
0
2

r
a

M
7

]

G
L
.
s
c
[

2
v
9
0
2
4
0
.
0
1
4
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

EQUIVARIANT NEURAL FUNCTIONAL NETWORKS
FOR TRANSFORMERS

Viet-Hoang Tran1* Thieu N. Vo1* An Nguyen The2* Tho Tran Huu1
Minh-Khoi Nguyen-Nhat2 Thanh Tran3 Duy-Tung Pham2 Tan M. Nguyen1
1National University of Singapore
3VinUniversity, Vietnam
{hoang.tranviet, thotranhuu}@u.nus.edu, {thieuvo, tanmn}@nus.edu.sg
{annt68, khoinnm1, tungpd10}@fpt.com, anonymous@anonymous.org

2FPT Software AI Center, Vietnam

ABSTRACT

This paper systematically explores neural functional networks (NFN) for trans-
former architectures. NFN are specialized neural networks that treat the weights,
gradients, or sparsity patterns of a deep neural network (DNN) as input data and
have proven valuable for tasks like learnable optimizers, implicit data represen-
tations, and weight editing. While NFN have been extensively developed for
MLP and CNN, no prior work has addressed their design for transformers, de-
spite their importance in modern deep learning. This paper aims to address this
gap by systematically studying NFN for transformers. We first determine the
maximal symmetric group of the weights in a multi-head attention module and
a necessary and sufficient condition under which two sets of hyperparameters of
the module define the same function. We then define the weight space of trans-
former architectures and its associated group action, leading to design principles
for NFN in transformers. Based on these, we introduce Transformer-NFN, an
NFN equivariant under this group action. Additionally, we release a dataset of
over 125,000 Transformers model checkpoints trained on two datasets with two
tasks, providing a benchmark for evaluating Transformer-NFN and encouraging
further research on transformer training and performance. The code is publicly
available at https://github.com/MathematicalAI-NUS/Transformer-NFN.

1

INTRODUCTION

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have become highly flexible and adaptable modeling tools, widely
employed in domains such as natural language processing (Rumelhart et al., 1986; Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber, 1997; Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2019; Nielsen et al., 2025b; Gu & Dao,
2024; Vo et al., 2025), computer vision (He et al., 2015; Szegedy et al., 2015; Krizhevsky et al.,
2012; Huang et al., 2020; Nguyen et al., 2023a), and natural science (Raissi et al., 2019; Jumper
et al., 2021; Portwood et al., 2019). Increasing attention is being given to constructing specialized
neural networks that treat the weights, gradients, or sparsity patterns of DNNs as inputs. These
specialized networks are referred to as neural functional networks (NFNs) (Zhou et al., 2024b).
NFNs have proven useful in various applications, such as designing learnable optimizers for neural
network training (Bengio et al., 2013; Runarsson & Jonsson, 2000; Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Metz
et al., 2022), extracting information from implicit representations of data (Stanley, 2007; Mildenhall
et al., 2021; Runarsson & Jonsson, 2000), performing targeted weight editing (Sinitsin et al., 2020;
Cao et al., 2021; Mitchell et al., 2022), evaluating policies (Harb et al., 2020), and applying Bayesian
inference with neural networks (Sokota et al., 2021).

The construction of NFNs presents significant challenges due to the complexity and high dimen-
sionality of their structures. Earlier approaches sought to address this by constraining the training
process, thereby restricting the weight space (Dupont et al., 2022b; Bauer et al., 2023; Luigi et al.).
More recently, research has shifted towards the development of permutation-equivariant NFNs, ca-
pable of operating on neural network weights without such constraints (Navon et al., 2023; Zhou
et al., 2024b; Kofinas et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024c). These advancements have resulted in NFNs

∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to: anonymous@anonymous.org and anonymous@anonymous.org

1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

that exhibit equivariance to weight permutations, which correspond to neuron rearrangements within
hidden layers. Additionally, NFNs that are equivariant to both permutations and operations such as
scaling or sign-flipping have been proposed. These include graph-based message-passing meth-
ods as described in (Kalogeropoulos et al., 2024) and parameter sharing techniques in (Tran et al.,
2024). However, most of the recent neural functional networks are designed for Multilayer Percep-
trons (MLPs) and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs).

Transformers have achieved remarkable success in the field of natural language processing (NLP)
(Vaswani et al., 2017; Bahdanau et al., 2015; Nguyen et al., 2023b; Nielsen et al., 2025a), powering
large-scale language models. These models highlight the transformer architecture’s capacity to per-
form a broad range of NLP-related tasks and its applicability to real-world scenarios. The influence
of Transformers extends beyond NLP, finding applications in areas such as computer vision through
Vision Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), reinforcement learning (Parisotto et al., 2020; Chen
et al., 2021), audio processing (Radford et al., 2023), multi-modal data integration (Radford et al.,
2021), and robotics (Monastirsky et al., 2022). Despite the significance of Transformers, no sys-
tematic development of NFNs for Transformers has been realized to date. Addressing the design
principle of NFNs for Transformers, as well as constructing equivariant NFNs capable of processing
transformer models, has thus emerged as a critical research problem.

1.1 BACKGROUND

Self-attention is the core component of a transformer block (Cho et al.; Lin et al., 2017; Parikh
et al., 2016; Teo & Nguyen, 2025). Self-attention learns to align tokens within an input sequence
by assessing the relative importance of each token in relation to all other tokens. It then transforms
each token into a weighted average of the feature representations of other tokens, with the weights
determined by importance scores between token pairs. These importance scores allow each token to
attend to others in the sequence, effectively capturing contextual representations (Bahdanau et al.,
2015; Kim et al., 2017; Vaswani et al., 2017; Nguyen et al., 2022; Abdullaev & Nguyen, 2025).

Self-attention. Let X = [X1, . . . , XL]⊤ ∈ RL×D be an input sequence of L tokens with D
features. Each token is a vector Xi ∈ RD. The self-attention, denoted by Head, transforms X into
the output sequence Head(X) ∈ RL×Dv defined as

Head(X; W (Q), W (K), W (V )) = softmax

(cid:18) (XW (Q))(XW (K))⊤
√

Dk

(cid:19)

XW (V ),

(1)

where the parameters W (Q), W (K) ∈ RD×Dk and W (V ) ∈ RD×Dv are called the query, key and
value matrices. Here, Dk and Dv are given positive integers.

Multihead attention. To jointly attend to information from different representation subspaces at
different positions, a multihead attention is used. Let h be a positive integer which represents the
number of head. The multihead attention transforms the input sequence X ∈ RL×D to an output
sequence in RL×D defined by:
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

MultiHead

X; W (O), {W (Q,i), W (K,i), W (V,i)}h
(cid:32) h

i=1

(cid:77)

Head

(cid:16)

X; W (Q,i), W (K,i), W (V,i)(cid:17)

=

(cid:33)

W (O),

(2)

i=1

where each head is a self-attention defined in equation 1, and (cid:76) is the concatenation operator. Here,
the matrices W (Q,i), W (K,i) ∈ RD×Dk , W (V,i) ∈ RD×Dv and W (O) ∈ RhDv×D are learnable
from input data for some postive integers Dk and Dv.

1.2 CONTRIBUTION

This paper provides a systematic study on the development of a neural functional network (NFN)
for transformer architectures. To achieve this, we present three essential components for the study:
(1) a design principle of NFNs for Transformers that incorporates the maximal symmetric group
for the multi-head attention module, (2) an equivariant NFN for Transformers, which we will
call Transformer-NFN, and (3) a benchmark dataset for testing the applicability and efficiency of
Transformer-NFN. In particular, our contributions are four-fold:

2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

1. We determine the maximal symmetric group of the weights in a multi-head attention module,
establishing the necessary and sufficient conditions under which two sets of hyperparameters
for a multi-head attention module define the same function.

2. We formally define the weight space of a transformer architecture, along with a group action
on this weight space. In conjunction with the maximal symmetric group of the weights in
multi-head attention modules, we characterize the design principles for NFNs in transformer
architectures.

3. We introduce Transformer-NFN, an NFN for transformer architectures that is equivariant un-
der the specified group action. The main building block of Transformer-NFN is an equivariant
polynomial layer derived from a parameter-sharing strategy.

4. We release Small Transformer Zoo dataset, which consists of more than 125,000 Transformers
model checkpoints trained on two different tasks: digit image classification on MNIST and
text topic classificaction on AGNews. To our knowledge, this the first dataset of its kind. This
dataset serves as a benchmark for testing the applicability and efficiency of our Transformer-
NFN, while also encouraging further research in this field to gain a deeper understanding of
transformer network training and performance.

We empirically demonstrate that Transformer-NFN consistently outperforms other baseline models
on our constructed datasets. Through comprehensive ablation studies, we emphasize Transformer-
NFN’s ability to effectively capture information within the transformer block, establishing it as a
robust predictor of model generalization.

Organization. Following a review of related works in Section 2, we derive the maximal symmetric
group of multihead attention in Section 3. In Section 4, we construct the weight space of a stan-
dard transformer block and define a corresponding group action. Section 5 introduces a family of
equivariant NFNs for Transformers, referred to as Transformer-NFNs. We then present the setting
and details of the Small Transformer Zoo dataset in Section 6. Finally, in Section 7, we evaluate the
applicability and efficiency of Transformer-NFNs on this dataset.

2 RELATED WORK

Symmetries of weight spaces. The exploration of symmetries within the weight spaces of neu-
ral networks, which relates to assessing the functional equivalence of these networks, is a well-
established field of study (Allen-Zhu et al., 2019; Du et al., 2019; Frankle & Carbin; Belkin et al.,
2019; Novak et al., 2018). This topic was first introduced by Hecht-Nielsen in (Hecht-Nielsen,
1990). Following this, numerous studies have yielded insights for various network architectures, as
detailed in (Chen et al., 1993; Fefferman & Markel, 1993; Kurkova & Kainen, 1994; Albertini &
Sontag, 1993b;a; Bui Thi Mai & Lampert, 2020).

Neural functional networks. Recent studies have aimed to develop representations for trained clas-
sifiers to evaluate their generalization performance and understand neural network behavior (Baker
et al., 2018; Eilertsen et al.; Unterthiner et al., 2020; Sch¨urholt et al., 2021; 2022a;b). Notably, low-
dimensional encodings for Implicit Neural Representations (INRs) have been created for various
downstream tasks (Dupont et al., 2022a; Luigi et al.). Sch¨urholt et al. (2021) proposed neuron per-
mutation augmentations, and other research has focused on encoding and decoding neural network
parameters for reconstruction and generative purposes (Peebles et al., 2022; Ashkenazi et al., 2023;
Knyazev et al., 2021; Erkoc¸ et al., 2023).

Equivariant NFNs for MLPs and CNNs. Recent advancements have made considerable strides
in addressing the limitations of permutation equivariant neural networks through the introduction of
permutation equivariant layers. These layers employ intricate weight-sharing patterns (Navon et al.,
2023; Zhou et al., 2024b; Kofinas et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024c), as well as set-based (Andreis
et al., 2023) and graph-based structures of the network’s weights (Lim et al., 2024; Kofinas et al.,
2024; Zhou et al., 2024a), to maintain equivariance. Moreover, monomial equivariant NFNs, which
are equivariant to both permutations and scaling, have been proposed in (Kalogeropoulos et al.,
2024) utilizing a graph-based message-passing mechanism and in (Tran et al., 2024; Vo et al., 2024)
through a parameter sharing mechanism.

3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

3 MAXIMAL SYMMETRIC GROUP OF A MULTI-HEAD ATTENTION

As the first step in characterizing a principal design of NFNs for Transformers, we need to decide
when two tuples of matrices with appropriate sizes, say
and
(cid:18)(cid:110)
(V,i)(cid:111)h

(cid:16)(cid:8)W (Q,i), W (K,i), W (V,i)(cid:9)h

i=1 , W (O)(cid:17)

(O)(cid:19)

(K,i)

(Q,i)

, W

, define the same Multihead map. We provide a complete

W

, W

, W

i=1

answer for this step in this section, thus characterizing the maximal symmetric group of the weights
of Multihead.

Let us consider the MultiHead map with h heads defined in Equation (2). We can rewrite
MultiHead as:

MultiHead

(cid:18)

X; W (O),

W (Q,i), W (K,i), W (V,i)(cid:111)h
(cid:110)

i=1

(cid:19)

=

=

=

Head

(cid:16)

X; W (Q,i), W (K,i), W (V,i)(cid:17)

(cid:33)

W (O)

(cid:32) h

(cid:77)

i=1

h
(cid:88)

i=1

h
(cid:88)

i=1

Head

(cid:16)

X; W (Q,i), W (K,i), W (V,i)(cid:17)

W (O,i)

(cid:32)

(cid:32)

softmax

X ·

W (Q,i) · (cid:0)W (K,i)(cid:1)⊤
√
Dk

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

· X ⊤

· X ·

(cid:16)

W (V,i) · W (O,i)(cid:17)

,

where W (O) = (cid:0)W (O,1), . . . , W (O,h)(cid:1) with each W (O,i) ∈ RDv×D. Here,
(cid:0)W (Q)(cid:1) · (cid:0)W (K)(cid:1)⊤
tion, we define for each positive integer h and each sequence of matrices {Ai, Bi}h
map

the matrices
Dk and W (V,i) · W (O,i) have the same size D × D. Based on this observa-
i=1 in RD×D a

√

/

F (cid:0)·; {Ai, Bi}h

i=1

(cid:1) :

(cid:71)

l>0

Rl×D ! (cid:71)
l>0

Rl×D,

defined by

F (X; {Ai, Bi}h

i=1) :=

h
(cid:88)

i=1

softmax (cid:0)X · Ai · X ⊤(cid:1) · X · Bi,

for each X ∈ Rl×D. It is noted that, for each integer l > 0, the image of Rl×D via F is contained in
Rl×Dv and F can be viewed as a generalization of MultiHead. With this setting at hand, we proved
that:

Theorem 3.1 (Independence of heads in multi-head attention). Let D be a positive integer. Assume
that for a positive integer h, matrices A1, A2, . . . , Ah ∈ RD×D and B1, B2, . . . , Bh ∈ RD×D, we
have

(cid:16)

F

X; {Ai, Bi}h

i=1

(cid:17)

= 0,

(3)

for all positive integers L and X ∈ RL×D. Then, if A1, A2, . . . , Ah are pairwise distinct, then

B1 = . . . = Bh = 0.
Remark 1. Roughly speaking, the above theorem says that, in the multi-head attention, each indi-
vidual head plays its own unique role.

Based on the above theorem, we characterize the maximal symmetric group of the weights of
MultiHead in the following theorem.
Theorem 3.2 (Maximal symmetric group of multi-head attentions). Let h, D, Dk, Dv be positive in-
tegers. Let (cid:0)W (Q,i), W (K,i), W (V,i), W (O,i)(cid:1) and
be arbitrary
elements of RD×Dk × RD×Dk × RD×Dv × RDv×D with i = 1, . . . , h. Assume that

(O,i)(cid:17)

, W

, W

, W

(K,i)

(Q,i)

(V,i)

W

(cid:16)

(a) max(Dk, Dv) ⩽ D,

4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

(b) the matrices W (Q,i)·(cid:0)W (K,i)(cid:1)⊤

, W

(Q,i)

(K,i)(cid:17)⊤

(cid:16)

·

W

, W (V,i)·W (O,i), and W

(V,i)

·W

(O,i)

are of full rank,

(c) the matrices W (Q,i) · (cid:0)W (K,i)(cid:1)⊤

with i = 1, . . . , h are pairwise distinct,

(d) the matrices W

(Q,i)

(cid:16)

·

W

(K,i)(cid:17)⊤

with i = 1, . . . , h are pairwise distinct.

Then the following are equivalent:

1. For every positive integer L and every X ∈ RL×D, we always have
W (Q,i), W (K,i), W (V,i), W (O,i)(cid:111)h
(cid:110)
(cid:18)

MultiHead

X;

(cid:18)

i=1

= MultiHead

X;

W

, W

, W

, W

(Q,i)

(K,i)

(V,i)

(cid:110)

(cid:19)

(O,i)(cid:111)h

(cid:19)

.

(4)

i=1

2. There exist matrices M (i) ∈ GLDk (R) and N (i) ∈ GLDv (R) for each i = 1, . . . , h, as

well as a permutation τ ∈ Sh, such that
(K,τ (i))

(Q,τ (i))

(V,τ (i))

(cid:16)

(O,τ (i))(cid:17)

W

, W

, W
W (Q,i) · (M (i))⊤, W (K,i) · (M (i))−1, W (V,i) · N (i), (N (i))−1 · W (O,i)(cid:17)

, W

(cid:16)

=

. (5)

Remark 2 (Necessity of the assumptions (a), (b), (c), and (d)). The four assumptions in Theorem 3.2
are necessary for the implication (1.) ⇒ (2.). Indeed, the assumptions (c) and (d) are needed to
utilize Theorem 3.1. In addition, it follows from Theorem 3.1 and item (1.) that

W (Q,i) · (W (K,i))⊤ = W

W (V,i) · W (O,i)

=

W

(Q,τ (i))

·
(V,τ (i))

(cid:16)

(K,τ (i))(cid:17)⊤

W

= Ai, and

(O,τ (i))

· W

= Bi

for some matrices Ai, Bi ∈ RD×D. At this point, the assumptions (a) and (b) are necessary to
utilize the rank decomposition of Ai and Bi to obtain the symmetries of the factors (Piziak & Odell,
1999). It worth noting that these assumptions are generically satisfied in practical implementations
since the parameters of MultiHead are randomly initialized with dimensions Dk ⩽ D and Dv ⩽ D.
Remark 3 (Maximal symmetric group of multi-head attentions). Theorem 3.2 suggests that a multi-
head attention in practice is characterized by the products W (Q,i) · (cid:0)W (K,i)(cid:1)⊤
and W (V,i) · W (O,i)
at each head. As a consequence, we can consider the group Sh × GLDk (R)h × GLDv (R)h to be the
maximal symmetric group of the MultiHead map.

4 WEIGHT SPACE OF A TRANSFORMER BLOCK AND GROUP ACTION

In this section, we construct the weight space of a standard transformer block and define a group
action on it. Let us first recall necessary notations from permutation matrices before defining the
weight space in Section 4.2 and the group action in Section 4.3.

4.1 PERMUTATION MATRICES

Definition 4.1. Let n be a positive integer. A matrix of size n × n is called a permutation matrix if
it has exactly one entry equal to 1 in each row and each column, and zeros elsewhere. We denote by
Pn the set of such all permutation matrices.
Remark 4 (Permutation matrix vs. permutation). For every permutation matrix P ∈ Pn, there exists
a unique permutation π ∈ Sn such that P is obtained by permuting the n columns of the identity
matrix In according to π. In this case, we write P := Pπ and call it the permutation matrix corre-
sponding to π. Here, Sn is the group of all permutations of the set {1, 2, . . . , n}. In particular, for
permutation matrices Pπ ∈ Pn and Pσ ∈ Pm, we have

Pπ · x = (cid:0)xπ−1(1), xπ−1(2), . . . , xπ−1(n)

(cid:1)⊤

,

and

for all vector x ∈ Rn and matrix A ∈ Rn×m.

( Pπ · A · Pσ)ij = Aπ−1(i)σ(j),

(6)

(7)

5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

4.2 WEIGHT SPACE

A standard transformer block, which will be denoted by Attn from now on, contains a multi-head
attention and a two-linear-layer ReLU MLP as well as a layer normalization. Formally, Attn trans-
forms an input sequence X ∈ RL×D to an output sequence Attn(X) ∈ RL×D defined as follows:

Attn(X) = LayerNorm

(cid:16)

ReLU

(cid:16) ˆX · W (A) + 1L · b(A)(cid:17)

· W (B) + 1L · b(B)(cid:17)

,

where

ˆX = LayerNorm

(cid:16)

MultiHead

(cid:16)

X; {W (Q,i), W (K,i), W (V,i), W (O,i)}h

i=1

(cid:17)(cid:17)

.

(8)

(9)

with 1L = [1, . . . , 1]⊤ ∈ RL×1. This transformer block is parametrized by the following matrices:

• (cid:0)W (Q,i), W (K,i), W (V,i), W (O,i)(cid:1)
inside the multi-head attention, and

i=1,...,h ∈ (cid:0)RD×Dk × RD×Dk × RD×Dv × RDv×D(cid:1)h

• weights (W (A), W (B)) ∈ RD×DA × RDA×D and biases (b(A), b(B)) ∈ R1×DA × R1×D

inside the two-linear-layers ReLU MLP.

The weight space of this transformer block, say U, is the vector space:
U = (cid:0)RD×Dk × RD×Dk × RD×Dv × RDv×D(cid:1)h

× (cid:0)RD×DA × RDA×D(cid:1) × (cid:0)R1×DA × R1×D(cid:1).
(10)

We write each element U ∈ U in the form

U =

(cid:16)(cid:16)

[W ](Q,i), [W ](K,i), [W ](V,i), [W ](O,i)(cid:17)

(cid:16)

[W ](A), [W ](B)(cid:17)

,

(cid:16)
[b](A), [b](B)(cid:17)(cid:17)

.

,

i=1,...,h

(11)

To emphasize the weights of each Attn map, we will write Attn(X; U ) instead of Attn(X). In
particular, each element U ∈ U will define a map Attn(·; U ) : RL×D ! RL×D, which maps a
sequence X ∈ RL×D to a sequence Attn(X; U ) ∈ RL×D defined by equation 8 and equation 9. In
the next section, we will find a sufficient condition for a pair U and U ′ in U such that Attn(·; U ) =
Attn(·; U ′).

4.3 GROUP ACTION ON WEIGHT SPACE

Let us consider the weight space U of a standard transformer block defined in Equation (10) and
Equation (11). We consider the symmetries of U which arise from the following two sources:

• the maximal symmetric group of the multi-head attention, which are characterized in The-

orem 3.2;

• the permutation symmetries represented by permutation matrices, which arise from the

unordered structure of neurons in the two-layer ReLU MLP.

Based on these observations, we consider the group

GU = Sh × GLDk (R)h × GLDv (R)h × PD × PDA .
(12)
This group will serve as the symmetric group of the standard attention block. Each element g ∈ GU
has the form

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

g =

τ, (Mi)i=1,...,h, (Ni)i=1,...,h, PπO , PπA

,

(13)

where τ ∈ Sh, πO ∈ SD, πA ∈ SDA are permutations and Mi, Ni are invertible matrices of
appropriate sizes. The action of GU on U is defined formally as follows:
Definition 4.2 (Group action). With notation as above, the action of GU on U is defined to be a
map GU × U ! U which maps an element (g, U ) ∈ GU × U with U and g given in equation 11
and equation 13 to the element

(cid:18)(cid:16)

[gW ](Q,i), [gW ](K,i), [gW ](V,i), [gW ](O,i)(cid:17)

gU =

(cid:16)

[gW ](A), [gW ](B)(cid:17)

,

[gb](A), [gb](B)(cid:17)(cid:19)

,

(14)

,

i=1,...,h
(cid:16)

6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

where

[gW ](Q,i) = [W ](Q,τ (i)) ·

(cid:16)

M (τ (i))(cid:17)⊤

,

[gW ](V,i) = [W ](V,τ (i)) · N (τ (i)),

[gW ](A) = P −1
πO
[gb](A) = [b](A) · PπA ,

· [W ](A) · PπA ,

(cid:16)

M (τ (i))(cid:17)−1

,

· [W ](O,τ (i)) · PπO ,

[gW ](K,i) = [W ](K,τ (i)) ·
N (τ (i))(cid:17)−1
· [W ](B),

[gW ](B) = P −1
πA

[gW ](O,i) =

(cid:16)

[gb](B) = [b](B).

We conclude the construction of the group action on U in the following theorem which results in a
design principle for transformer blocks.
Theorem 4.3 (Invariance of Attn under the action of GU ). With notations as above, we have

Attn(X; gU ) = Attn(X; U )

(15)

for all U ∈ U, g ∈ G, and X ∈ RL×D.
Remark 5 (Other types of symmetries). The group GU defined above does not cover all symme-
tries of the weight space U. Indeed, there are symmetries of scaling type arising from the internal
architecture of the ReLU MLP (see (Godfrey et al., 2022; Tran et al., 2024)). In addition, layer
normalization also offers additional scaling and sign-flipping symmetries for U (see Appendix B).
We leave designing the maximal symmetric group of a transformer block for future study.

5 EQUIVARIANT POLYNOMIAL NFNS FOR TRANSFORMERS

In this section, we introduce a family of NFNs specifically designed for Transformers, referred to as
Transformer-NFNs, which are equivariant to the group GU as described in equation 12. The main
building blocks of Transformer-NFNs consist of GU -equivariant and GU -invariant polynomial layers.
We will outline the construction of a class of GU -invariant polynomial layers below. The detailed
construction of the GU -equivariant polynomial layers, which follows a similar approach, will be
thoroughly derived in Appendix D.
In concrete, we define a polynomial map I : U ! RD′
I(U ) ∈ RD′

with maps each element U ∈ U to the vector

of the form
D
D
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

h
(cid:88)

s=1

p=1

q=1

Φ(QK,s):p,q · [W W ](QK,s)

p,q

+

h
(cid:88)

D
(cid:88)

D
(cid:88)

s=1

p=1

q=1

Φ(V O,s):p,q · [W W ](V O,s)

p,q

+

+

+

+

h
(cid:88)

D
(cid:88)

Dk(cid:88)

s=1

p=1

q=1

h
(cid:88)

D
(cid:88)

Dv(cid:88)

s=1

p=1

q=1

Φ(Q,s):p,q · [W ](Q,s)

p,q +

h
(cid:88)

D
(cid:88)

Dk(cid:88)

s=1

p=1

q=1

Φ(K,s):p,q · [W ](K,s)

p,q

Φ(V,s):p,q · [W ](V,s)

p,q +

h
(cid:88)

Dv(cid:88)

D
(cid:88)

s=1

p=1

q=1

Φ(O,s):p,q · [W ](O,s)

p,q

D
(cid:88)

DA(cid:88)

p=1

q=1

Φ(A):p,q · [W ](A)

p,q +

DA(cid:88)

D
(cid:88)

p=1

q=1

Φ(B):p,q · [W ](B)
p,q

DA(cid:88)

q=1

Φ(A):q · [b](A)

q +

D
(cid:88)

q=1

Φ(B):q · [b](B)

q + Φ1,

(16)

I(U ) =

where

(cid:16)

[W ](K,s)(cid:17)⊤

,

[W W ](QK,s) := [W ](Q,s) ·

[W W ](V O,s) := [W ](V,s) · [W ](O,s),

and
and the coefficients Φ−s are matrices of size D′ × 1.
Remark 6 (I(U ) as a quadratic polynomial). Intuitively speaking, I(U ) is a linear combination
of all entries of the matrices [W ](Q,s), [W ](K,s), [W ](V,s), [W ](O,s), [W ](A), [W ](B), [b](A), and
[b](B) in U , as well as all entries of the additional matrices [W W ](QK,s) and [W W ](V O,s) defined
in Equation (17). Since the entries of the matrices [W W ](QK,s) and [W W ](V O,s) are polynomials
of degree 2, the map I(U ) is indeed a quadratic polynomial in the entries of U . These additional
quadratic terms help us incorporate more relations between weights inside the input multi-head
attention block, thus allowing Transformer-NFN to maintain its expressivity.

(17)

7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

The above formula for I(U ) is irredundant in the following sense:
Proposition 5.1. With notation as above, if I(U ) = 0 for all U ∈ U, then Φ− = 0 for all coefficients
Φ−.

To make I to be GU -invariant, the parameters Φ− must satisfy a system of constraints (usually
called parameter sharing), which are induced from the condition I(gU ) = I(U ) for all g ∈ GU and
U ∈ U. We show in details what are these constraints and how to derive the concrete formula of I
in Appendix E. The formula of I is then determined by

I(U ) =

D
(cid:88)

D
(cid:88)

p=1

q=1

Φ(QK,•):p,q ·

(cid:32) h
(cid:88)

[W W ](QK,s)

p,q

s=1

(cid:33)

+

D
(cid:88)

D
(cid:88)

p=1

q=1

Φ(V O,•):p,• ·

+

+

D
(cid:88)

DA(cid:88)

p=1

q=1

Φ(A):•,• · [W ](A)

p,q +

DA(cid:88)

D
(cid:88)

p=1

q=1

Φ(B):•,q · [W ](B)
p,q

DA(cid:88)

q=1

Φ(A):• · [b](A)

q +

D
(cid:88)

q=1

Φ(B):q · [b](B)

q + Φ1

(cid:32) h
(cid:88)

[W W ](V O,s)

p,q

(cid:33)

s=1

(18)

In the above formula, the bullet • indicates that the value of the corresponding coefficient is inde-
pendent of the index at the bullet.
Theorem 5.2. With notation as above, the polynomial map I : U ! RD′
defined by Equation (18)
is GU -invariant. Moreover, if a map given in Equation (16) is GU -invariant, then it has the form
given in Equation (18).

The concrete formula for the polynomial GU -equivariant layer is presented in detail in Appendix D.

6 THE SMALL TRANSFORMER ZOO DATASET

Large-scale empirical studies have produced datasets of trained classification models with varied
hyperparameters (Eilertsen et al.; Unterthiner et al., 2020), enabling data-driven approaches to mod-
eling generalization. However, a dataset of Transformer-based classification models is absent. Mo-
tivated by this shortage, we introduce the Small Transformer Zoo dataset to experimentally demon-
strate the efficacy of our proposed method. This dataset contains the weights of a fixed Transformer
architecture trained on two distinct datasets, spanning both vision and language tasks. Each en-
try in the dataset includes a checkpoint weight along with its corresponding accuracy metrics and
hyperparameter configurations.

General settings. We focus on two prevalent deep learning tasks: digit image classification using
the MNIST dataset (LeCun & Cortes, 2005) for vision, and text topic classification using AGNews
(Zhang et al., 2015) for natural language processing. This selection covers two primary data modal-
ities in deep learning—image and text—while addressing classification tasks, which are among the
most common and fundamental in the field. Our model architecture contains three components: an
embedding layer, an encoder, and a classifier. The embedding layer processes raw input data to
produce initial token embeddings, which the encoder then transforms through self-attention mech-
anisms to capture contextual relationships. Finally, the classifier generates the classification output
based on these enriched embeddings. While we adapt the embedding and classifier components to
each specific task, we maintain a consistent encoder architecture across both tasks, consisting of two
stacked two-head transformer blocks as defined in Equation (8).

Our resulting datasets, named MNIST-Transformers and AGNews-Transformers, consist of 62756
and 63796 model checkpoints, respectively. These models were generated by varying key hyper-
parameters such as the optimizer, learning rate, weight regularization, weight initialization, and
dropout, as detailed in Appendix G. By making these datasets available, we aim to facilitate and
inspire further research into the inner workings and behavior of Transformer models.

7 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

We empirically evaluate the performance of the proposed Transformer-NFN model on two datasets:
MNIST-Transformers and AGNews-Transformers. Additionally, we conduct ablation studies to ex-
amine the contribution of each component within the Transformer architecture in predicting network

8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Table 1: Performance measured by Kendall’s τ of all models on MNIST-Transformers dataset. Un-
certainties indicate standard error over 5 runs.

MLP
STATNN (Unterthiner et al., 2020)
XGBoost (Chen & Guestrin, 2016)
LightGBM (Ke et al., 2017)
Random Forest (Breiman, 2001)

No threshold

0.866 ± 0.002
0.881 ± 0.001
0.860 ± 0.002
0.858 ± 0.002
0.772 ± 0.002

20%

0.873 ± 0.001
0.872 ± 0.001
0.839 ± 0.004
0.835 ± 0.001
0.758 ± 0.004

Accuracy threshold
40%

60%

80%

0.874 ± 0.003
0.868 ± 0.001
0.869 ± 0.003
0.847 ± 0.001
0.769 ± 0.001

0.874 ± 0.006
0.86 ± 0.001
0.846 ± 0.001
0.822 ± 0.001
0.752 ± 0.001

0.873 ± 0.007
0.856 ± 0.001
0.884 ± 0.001
0.830 ± 0.001
0.759 ± 0.001

Transformer-NFN (ours)

0.905 ± 0.002

0.899 ± 0.001

0.895 ± 0.001

0.895 ± 0.002

0.888 ± 0.002

Table 2: Performance measured by Kendall’s τ of all models on AGNews-Transformers dataset.
Uncertainties indicate standard error over 5 runs.

MLP
STATNN (Unterthiner et al., 2020)
XGBoost (Chen & Guestrin, 2016)
LightGBM (Ke et al., 2017)
Random Forest (Breiman, 2001)

No threshold

0.879 ± 0.006
0.841 ± 0.002
0.859 ± 0.001
0.835 ± 0.001
0.774 ± 0.003

20%

0.875 ± 0.001
0.839 ± 0.003
0.852 ± 0.002
0.845 ± 0.001
0.801 ± 0.001

Accuracy threshold
40%

60%

80%

0.841 ± 0.012
0.812 ± 0.003
0.872 ± 0.002
0.837 ± 0.001
0.797 ± 0.001

0.842 ± 0.001
0.813 ± 0.001
0.874 ± 0.001
0.835 ± 0.001
0.798 ± 0.002

0.862 ± 0.006
0.812 ± 0.001
0.872 ± 0.001
0.820 ± 0.001
0.773 ± 0.001

Transformer-NFN (ours)

0.910 ± 0.001

0.908 ± 0.001

0.897 ± 0.001

0.896 ± 0.001

0.890 ± 0.001

generalization, and investigate the impact of varying the Transformer-NFN dimension and the num-
ber of layers on the overall performance. Our analysis yields three key findings: (1) Transformer-
NFN, with its enhanced layers for processing transformer block parameters, outperforms existing
baselines in both vision and NLP Transformers datasets, maintains consistent performance across
different accuracy thresholds of the data (2) the information embedded in the weights of Trans-
former blocks provides a strong predictor for the performance of transformer model, and (3) good
performance for Transformer-NFN can be obtained with a compact setting.

We use Kendall’s τ rank correlation (Kendall, 1938), ranging from [−1, 1], as the evaluation metric
to assess how closely predicted accuracy rankings align with ground truth accuracy rankings. A
value near 1 indicates strong agreement, as shown in the scatterplot in Figure 2 (in Appendix H).
All results in this section are averaged over 5 runs with different random seeds, with details on
hyperparameters and training settings provided in Appendix H.

7.1 PREDICTING VISION TRANSFORMERS GENERALIZATION FROM PRETRAINED WEIGHTS

Experiment Setup.
In this experiment, we focus on predicting the test accuracy of pretrained
Vision Transformer models using only their weights, without access to the test set. To perform
this task, we utilize our MNIST-Transformers dataset. We evaluate our model against 5 models:
MLP, STATNN (Unterthiner et al., 2020), XGBoost (Chen & Guestrin, 2016), LightGBM (Ke et al.,
2017), and Random Forest (Breiman, 2001). As shown in Figure 1 (in Appendix H), the accuracy
distribution of the MNIST-Transformers dataset is highly skewed (notice the log scale on the y-axis).
Therefore, we evaluate each model’s prediction performance not only on the entire dataset but also
on four smaller subsets, each filtered by accuracy thresholds of 20%, 40%, 60%, and 80%. As a
significant portion of pretrained models in the dataset exhibit higher accuracy, achieving a strong
Kendall’s τ correlation becomes increasingly challenging as the accuracy thresholds increase.

Results. Table 1 illustrates the results of all models when predicting generalization of Vision Trans-
former networks trained on MNIST-Transformer dataset. As expected, Kendall’s τ generally de-
creases as the accuracy threshold increases. In addition, our Transformer-NFN consistently outper-
forms all four baseline models across all dataset settings with performance gap ranging from 0.004
to 0.026, demonstrating the effectiveness of our model’s design in capturing the information within
each transformer block.

7.2 PREDICTING TEXT CLASSIFICATION TRANSFORMERS GENERALIZATION

Experiment Setup.
In this experiment, we utilize the AGNews-Transformers dataset to predict
the performance of pretrained transformer models in text classification. The goal is to evaluate the
effectiveness of Transformer-NFN in predicting the performance of pretrained models specifically
trained on language tasks. Similar to Experiment 7.1, we assess our model’s capabilities across dif-
ferent dataset configurations by using five subsets: the entire dataset without any accuracy threshold,
and four subsets with accuracy thresholds of 20%, 40%, 60%, and 80%, respectively.

9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Table 3: Ablation study the important of each component of the input networks on predicting gen-
eralization of the input network, the metric being used is Kendall’s τ .

No. of
components

1

2

3

Components

Encoder
Embedding
Classifier

Embedding + Classifier
Encoder + Classifier
Encoder + Embedding

MNIST-
Transformers

AGNews-
Transformers

0.902 ± 0.001
0.424 ± 0.002
0.847 ± 0.001

0.857 ± 0.003
0.904 ± 0.001
0.903 ± 0.001

0.909 ± 0.001
-
0.795 ± 0.008

-
0.910 ± 0.001
-

Encoder + Embedding + Classifier

0.905 ± 0.002

-

Results. Table 2 shows that our model consistently outperforms all baselines across all text clas-
sification dataset configurations. Compared to MNIST-Transformers, the performance gain is even
more pronounced, with Kendall’s τ gaps ranging from 0.018 to 0.033. As language tasks involve
more complex syntax, the transformer encoder captures richer information, allowing Transformer-
NFN to predict NLP performance more effectively than in vision tasks. Figure 2 (Appendix H)
further illustrates its superiority, particularly in generalization for low-accuracy networks.

7.3

IMPORTANCE OF ENCODER IN PREDICTING THE GENERALIZATION

A interesting question arises is how much information about the network generalization ability
is embedded in each component of the transformer model. To investigate this, we restrict our
Transformer-NFNs to access only certain subsets of the Transformer’s components and train the
model on MNIST-Transformers dataset and AGNews-Transformers dataset. Our goal is to deter-
mine the importance of each component, both individually and in combination, for predicting gen-
eralization of the input network.

Table 3 shows that for both MNIST-Transformers and AGNews-Transformers, transformer blocks
alone provide strong performance predictions. The classifier is the second most important compo-
nent, followed by the embedding. Even with only transformer block weights, our model achieves a
Kendall’s τ score nearly identical to using all components: 0.902 vs. 0.905 for MNIST-Transformers
and 0.909 vs. 0.91 for AGNews-Transformers.

7.4 ABALATION STUDY ON VARYING THE DIMENSION AND NUMBER OF LAYERS

In this section, we conduct an ablation study to explore the impact of varying the hidden dimension
and the number of equivariant layers in Transformer-NFN. We evaluate different configurations
of hidden dimensions and layer counts on the AGNews-Transformer dataset, with dimensions ∈
[3, 5, 10, 15], and number of layer ∈ [1, 2]. These configurations allow us to assess how changes in
model size affect performance and efficiency.

Table 5 (in Appendix H) demonstrates that strong performance can be achieved with a relatively
small dimension and few parameters. For example, with dimension of 15 and a single layer, the
model reaches a Kendall’s τ score of 0.913, matching the best performance across all settings. These
results suggest that good performance for our Transformer-NFN can be obtained with a compact
setting.

8 CONCLUSION

In this work, we made significant contributions to the understanding and application of NFNs in
transformer architectures. We determined the maximal symmetric group of the weights in a multi-
head attention module. We also formally defined the weight space of a transformer architecture
and introduced a group action on this weight space, thereby characterizing the design principles for
NFNs. Additionally, we presented Transformer-NFN, an NFN designed for transformer architec-
tures that is equivariant under the specified group action. Finally, we released a dataset of more than
125,000 transformers model checkpoints trained on two datasets with two different tasks, mark-
ing a significant resource for benchmarking the applicability and efficiency of Transformer-NFN
and promoting further research to enhance our understanding of transformer network training and
performance.

10

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research / project is supported by the National Research Foundation Singapore under the AI
Singapore Programme (AISG Award No: AISG2-TC-2023-012-SGIL). This research / project is
supported by the Ministry of Education, Singapore, under the Academic Research Fund Tier 1
(FY2023) (A-8002040-00-00, A-8002039-00-00). This research / project is supported by the NUS
Presidential Young Professorship Award (A-0009807-01-00) and the NUS Artificial Intelligence
Institute–Seed Funding (A-8003062-00-00).

Thieu N. Vo is supported by the Singapore National Academy of Science under the SASEA Fellow-
ship Programme (Award No: NRF-MP-2025-0001).

Thanh Tran acknowledges support from the Application Driven Mathematics Program funded and
organized by the Vingroup Innovation Fund and VinBigData.

Ethics Statement. Given the nature of the work, we do not foresee any negative societal and ethical
impacts of our work.

Reproducibility Statement. Source codes for our experiments are provided in the supplementary
materials of the paper. The details of our experimental settings are given in Section 7 and the Ap-
pendix H. All datasets used in this paper are publicly available through an anonymous link provided
in the README file of the supplementary material.