---
paper_id: 2405.04520
source: arxiv
title: NaturalCodeBench
converted_at: 2026-03-18T17:09:39.495824
note: "Content extracted before References section"
---

4
2
0
2

y
a
M
7

]
L
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
2
5
4
0
.
5
0
4
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

NaturalCodeBench: Examining Coding Performance
Mismatch on HumanEval and Natural User Prompts

Shudan Zhang12†∗, Hanlin Zhao1∗, Xiao Liu12∗, Qinkai Zheng12∗,
Zehan Qi12†, Xiaotao Gu1, Xiaohan Zhang1, Yuxiao Dong2, Jie Tang2

1Zhipu.AI

2Tsinghua University

Figure 1: Comparison between HumanEval and NATURALCODEBENCH. (Upper) Performance plot
of tested LLMs on both benchmarks. LLMs in red circle present relatively mismatched performances
on two benchmarks. (Lower) Case study on coding tasks in HumanEval and NCB. NCB is grounded
on natural prompts from real-world users and evaluated in an executable docker environment.

*SZ, HZ, XL, and QZ contributed equally.

Emails:

{anonymous@anonymous.org,

anonymous@anonymous.org, anonymous@anonymous.org, anonymous@anonymous.org}

†Work done when SZ and ZQ interned at Zhipu AI.

Preprint. Under review.

Case of HumanEvalCase of NaturalCodeBenchdef has_close_elements(numbers: List[ﬂoat], threshold: ﬂoat) -> bool:""" Check if in given list of numbers, are any two numbers closer to each other than given threshold."""Hello, please write a Python function for me. The function should read a markdown ﬁle, add numbering like x.y.z... to the titles of each level, and then return the modiﬁed string. Please note not to write into the original ﬁle.def add_section_numbering(markdown_ﬁle):""" markdown_ﬁle is the path to the markdown ﬁle. Return modiﬁed markdown ﬁle content string"""

Abstract

Large language models (LLMs) have manifested strong ability to generate codes
for productive activities. However, current benchmarks for code synthesis, such
as HumanEval, MBPP, and DS-1000, are predominantly oriented towards intro-
ductory tasks on algorithm and data science, insufficiently satisfying challenging
requirements prevalent in real-world coding. To fill this gap, we propose NATU-
RALCODEBENCH (NCB), a challenging code benchmark designed to mirror the
complexity and variety of scenarios in real coding tasks. NCB comprises 402
high-quality problems in Python and Java, meticulously selected from natural user
queries from online coding services, covering 6 different domains. Noting the
extraordinary difficulty in creating testing cases for real-world queries, we also
introduce a semi-automated pipeline to enhance the efficiency of test case construc-
tion. Comparing with manual solutions, it achieves an efficiency increase of more
than 4 times. Our systematic experiments on 39 LLMs find that performance gaps
on NCB between models with close HumanEval scores could still be significant,
indicating a lack of focus on practical code synthesis scenarios or over-specified
optimization on HumanEval. On the other hand, even the best-performing GPT-4
is still far from satisfying on NCB. The evaluation toolkit and development set are
available at https://github.com/THUDM/NaturalCodeBench.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) pre-trained on extensive open code repositories [13; 45; 33; 14] have
demonstrated impressive performance on code synthesis and even achieve performance comparable
to average human level in coding competitions [35]. Unlike open text generation, which often under-
scores human preferences as noted by [47], code synthesis prioritizes accuracy and the fulfillment of
user intent, essential for practical production and application.

As a result, evaluating code synthesis presents unique challenges in the era of LLMs. Traditional
evaluation metrics by token matching [48; 36; 50] show a weak correlation with human judgement
[21] and overlook functional correctness of the generated code 20; 56. Recently, execution-based
evaluation has gained increasing popularity, where code generated by models is tested through unit
tests to verify its functional correctness. It leads to the development of several benchmarks, including
HumanEval [13], MBPP [7], MBXP [6], CodeContests [35], and DS-1000 [32].

Notwithstanding their commendable reliability and accuracy, these benchmarks fall short to suffi-
ciently capture the wide range of needs and complexity found in real-world engineering applications.
They are primarily limited to well-defined coding problems in algorithm, program basics, or data
science. For example, as shown in Figure 1, a problem from HumanEval [13] tests the implementation
of a basic function has_close_elements and takes floating-point arguments as inputs. However,
in practical applications, user engineering requirements can be much more complex and varied. In
Figure 1, we showcase an example adapted from a real user query, where the user asks to read and
parse XML files given certain tags. Difficult and costly though it is, curating a benchmark composed
of such problems is meaningful for evaluating the real user experience of LLM code synthesis.

Contributions. In light of the challenge, we introduce NATURALCODEBENCH (NCB), a challenging
application-driven dataset for code synthesis evaluation. NCB is dedicated to creating a reliable
evaluation environment that is more aligned with real-world applications. We leverage an CodeGeeX
[70] online services to collect real and diverse application-related user queries. After filtering and
reprocessing, 402 high-quality Python and Java problems are compiled, covering 6 domains including
software, front-end, system administration, and artificial intelligence, highlighting practical scenarios.
Beyond basic data structures like lists and numbers, the test inputs for NCB problems include
versatile file types and other complex structures, making it more challenging.

The challenging nature of NCB necessitates significant human labor in its annotation process To
improve construction efficiency, we tailor a semi-automated annotation pipeline to curate high-quality,
testable, and useful queries with corresponding test cases. Specifically, we employ GPT-4 [45] to
generate reference solutions followed by manual correction. Subsequently, GPT-4, guided by the
problem descriptions and reference solutions, generates multiple test cases, which are also refined

2

Figure 2: Overview of NATURALCODEBENCH. 1) Data Collection: collecting real-world queries
from coding online services and selecting high-quality problems from the queries by GPT-3.5 and
human annotators. 2) Semi-Automated Pipeline: improving efficiency of constructing evaluation
framework by generating a solution and test cases with LLMs and then having them corrected by
human annotators.

with manual correction, for each problem. Consequently, the annotators are only required to correct
any errors, substantially reducing the time and manpower required. Comparative experiments reveal
that our semi-automated pipeline can quadruple the construction speed of the evaluation framework,
as evidenced by tests involving programming experts with or without the pipeline.

Based on NCB, we conduct extensive experiments on a variety range of LLMs, encompassing 39 APIs
or open models. The results indicate that although certain LLMs demonstrate comparable performance
on established benchmarks like HumanEval, they exhibit significant performance disparities when
evaluated using NCB. It suggests that there may be inadequate focus on optimizing LLMs for
practical coding applications, or have conducted over-specified optimization on HumanEval-style
problems. More importantly, even the best-performing GPT-4 only reaches about a pass rate of
53%, demonstrating a large room for LLMs to improve their coding skills to face real-world coding
challenges.

To facilitate community research, we pack up the whole NCB testing environment into a docker
image and make its development set publicly available. To sum up our contributions:

• We propose NATURALCODEBENCH, a benchmark that aligns with real-world applications,
comprising 402 problems in Python and Java across 6 domains. We open source 140 problems
(70 Python, 70 Java) as the development set of NCB for research purposes, but keep the 262
problems of the test set closed to avoid contamination.

• We introduce a semi-automated pipeline for the construction of code synthesis benchmarks, which
significantly reduces time and manpower costs without compromising the quality of test cases.
Comparative experiments reveal that our semi-automated pipeline can quadruple the construction
speed of the evaluation framework

• We systematically benchmark the code generation capabilities of 39 LLMs using NCB. Besides
quantitative evaluation, we carry out a deep insight into the present stage of development in LLMs
for code generation, and outline potential pathways for future progress.

2 Benchmark Construction

The overview of NCB is shown in Figure 2. The pipeline of constructing NCB consists of four steps:
1) collecting and filtering high-quality problems from online services (Section 2.1) 2) constructing
a complete evaluation framework through a semi-automated pipeline (Section 2.2) 3) designing
prompts to align different models (Section 2.3) 4) translating all problems and instructions to produce
bilingual versions (Section 2.4).

3

2. Semi-Automated Pipeline402 High-Quality ProblemsInstruction: ...generate 6 high-coverage and 4 corner test cases … def testcase1():…    assert groundTruth …1. Data CollectionHumanAnnotated33,120 Problems • Testable• Useful• DeterministicReal-World QueriesAuto Filtering Mannully SelectingReference Solutiondef groundTruth(ﬁle_path,tag_name)    root = ET.parse(ﬁle_path).getroot()    . . .    for … in root.ﬁndall(tag_name):        data_list.append(…)    return data_listLarge Language ModelProblems in 6 DomainsData ScienceSystem AdministrationSoftware EngineeringArtiﬁcial IntelligenceFront-EndAlgorithmTest CasesGenerate a solution and 10 test casesAnnotators ﬁxes all errors in the solution and test cases2.1 Problem Selection

Collecting Real-World Problems. To establish a meaningful and practical benchmark, we centered
on collecting real-world code problems frequently encountered by users. To achieve this, the seed
problems of NCB are cleaned from the queries in coding online services. A part of users have granted
permission for their data to be utilized exclusively for research purposes. We have strictly adhered to
this directive by collecting only the relevant data from these consenting users and have implemented
robust de-identification measures to eliminate any possibility of information leakage. We collect a
varied collection of queries, spanning multiple programming languages, problem types, and levels
of complexity. This diversity ensures that our benchmark accurately reflects a broad range of code
issues users encountering in practice. We specifically concentrated on queries related to Python and
Java, chosen for their widespread use in different domains.

Filtering Testable Problems. While it’s possible to source inexhaustible queries from online services,
many of these queries posed by users are either of low value or challenging to test the solution of
these queries. For instance, some users may only seek basic clarifications on a built-in function,
while others may not clearly articulate their objectives. To sieve out unsuitable queries for our testing,
we’ve implemented a two-step filtering process. Initially, we employ GPT-3.5 to filter out low-
quality queries, which saves on labour. This is achieved by adding specific criteria in the instruction,
instructing GPT-3.5 to abandon those problems that cannot meet all specified requirements. These
criteria are as follows: 1) Each query must involve at least one task, where the user requests the
model’s assistance in solving one or more problems. 2) Each query should be associated with several
input-output pairs, ensuring that a given input correspond to a singular, definitive output. 3) The
query must not contain any elements of randomness or uncertainty. The specifics of the instruction
are detailed in (Appendix A). Following this automated pre-screening, we conduct a manual review
to further refine the selection, adhering to the outlined criteria. This process yields a final set of 201
unique Python and 201 unique Java problems. It is noteworthy that over 80% of the initial queries
failed to meet our stringent requirements.

2.2 Semi-automated Pipeline

In this section, we will introduce our semi-automated pipeline. To generate structurally complex and
accurate test cases by GPT-4, it is first necessary to determine the arguments and return values of
functions, as well as the names of objects. Therefore, a completely accurate reference solution is
required initially. We generate a solution using GPT-4, then manually correct all errors. After this,
based on the problem description and the reference solution, we instruct GPT-4 to generate multiple
test cases. These are then reviewed by programming experts who correct errors and supplement any
deficiencies in the generated test cases.

Generating and Rewriting Reference Solution. GPT-4 is instructed to generate a solution for
each problem in NCB. It is important to note that while GPT-4 is highly capable, it is not infallible.
Therefore, each solution generated by GPT-4 is meticulously examined by expert programmers to
ensure correctness. In cases where the generated code contains errors, the expert programmers rewrite
the code to rectify these issues. This process ensures the quality of the reference solutions. Even
though we did not use the reference solution in NCB for evaluation, we provided them to facilitate
the generation of test cases and future research.

Build High-Coverage and Corner Evaluation. We employ GPT-4 to generate evaluation codes
for each problem. We construct a prompt using 1) the description of the problem for GPT-4 to
inspect; 2) the reference solution to demonstrate the names and formats in the code; 3) an instruction
to encourage GPT-4 to come up with effective test cases. Specifically, each prompt start with an
instruction that ask GPT-4 to produce ten test cases based on the description of problem and the
reference solution. Then, we present both the description of problem and its reference solution.
We finalize the prompt with a initial segment of the evaluation code to assist GPT-4 in accurately
generating the desired code format. Our objective is to harness GPT-4’s advanced comprehension
and analytical abilities to learn valid format in the code and essential functionalities of the reference
solution to enable the generation of superior test cases that are adept at uncovering latent errors in
code.

4

Benchmark

Instruction Information

Evaluation

#Problem

Domain

#Data Type #Word

Source

#Test Case

Method

Humaneval [13]
MBPP [7]
DS-1000 [32]
APPS [24]
Humaneval+ [37]

164
974
1,000
10,000
164

Algorithm
Program Basics
Data Sci.
Algorithm
Algorithm

NaturalCodeBench

402

Application

5
5
6
5
5

6

23.0 Hand-Written
15.7 Hand-Written
140.0 StackOverflow
293.2 Competitions
23.0 Hand-Written

7.7
3.0
1.6
13.2
764.1 Augmented Test Cases

Test-Case
Test-Case
Test-Case + SFC.
Test-Case

78.3 Online Services

9.3

Test-Case

Table 1: Comparison between NATURALCODEBENCH and other benchmarks for code generation.

A complete and effective test should seek to identify potential bugs at different locations in the code,
while also finding inputs that might trigger errors in the code. High coverage ensures that each
test case examines more code and branches, thereby facilitating the discovery of concealed errors.
Meanwhile, it is often observed that corner values in a problem’s input are most prone to trigger code
errors. Consequently, our instruction will cause some of the test cases generated by GPT-4 to have
higher coverage, while the other part will be some corner values contained in the problem, so as to
obtain more effective test cases.

Subsequently, expert programmers review and correct any test cases with formatting and answer
errors. To ensure that the final evaluation framework is error-free.

2.3 Alignment Between Different Models

In contrast to the problem format in Humaneval, the majority of problems in our benchmark are
composed in natural language by actual users. Consequently, there is no predetermined naming
convention for functions or classes created by models. This divergence can lead to inconsistencies
between the names generated by LLMs and those referenced in test cases. To address this issue
of name misalignment, we present a representative test case that includes the designated function
or class name and its usage within the test. We then instruct the LLMs to adhere to the naming
convention specified in the provided test case when generating solutions. It is important to note that
the test cases utilized for solution generation are not employed in subsequent testing phases. The
details of the instruction is showed in Appendix A.

2.4 Building Bilingual Benchmark

The majority of the questions we collected from online services are in Chinese, which is not fair for
the LLMs that are primarily designed for English. Therefore, we translate all the problems, resulting
in both Chinese and English versions.

3 Dataset Statistics

We provide more detailed statistics in Table 2. NCB comprises a total of 402 problems collected from
online services, with 201 problems in Python and 201 in Java, spanning across 6 domains: Database,
Artificial Intelligence, Data Science, Algorithm and Data Structure, Front-End, Software Engineering,
and System Administration. This diversity also leads to complex input data types in NCB, which
are classified into 9 categories: number (int/float/boolean), string, list (array), dict, tensor (matrix),
data frame (table), plain text file, image, and special format file. The first four are the most common
and simplest data types. Since a boolean can be represented by 1 and 0, we consider it as a type
of number. Matrix and list are two similar types of data, but they are categorized separately due
to differences in their usage scenarios. Due to the current popularity of deep learning, tensor has
become a very common data format. Therefore, we have designated a separate category for tensor
and have included matrix within this category. The last three are all file types, differentiated by their
processing methods. The content of a plain text file is text and can be directly read. Figures require
processing of each pixel value. A special format file refers to files that require specific methods for
processing, such as PDF and DOCX.

5

#Problems

Avg. #Test Cases

Dataset

Test

Dev

Total

Software
Data Sci.
Algorithm
Sys. Admin.
AI. System
Front-End

88
68
73
22
13
3

44
32
22
17
15
11

Total/Avg.

262

140

132
100
95
33
28
14

402

Test

9.7
9.6
9.5
9.6
9.6
10.0

9.6

Dev

Total

8.6
8.6
8.8
8.5
9.1
8.7

8.7

9.3
9.3
9.3
9.1
9.3
9.0

9.3

Table 2: Detailed statistics of NATURALCODEBENCH.

Each problem within the dataset has been carefully curated with a set of test cases to assess the
correctness of solutions. On average, there are 9.3 test cases associated with each problem. These
cases are strategically designed, with about 60% focused on enhancing statement and branch coverage,
and the remaining 40% dedicated to evaluating the robustness of solutions against corner values. The
average word count for each problem in the NCB is 78.3.

Compared with Other Benchmark. Table 1 compares NCB to other benchmarks. It is noteworthy
that our benchmark offers a substantial supplement to current benchmarks in terms of both problem
and data types. Unlike Humaneval and MBPP, which consist of 96.9% and 89.5% algorithmic and
basic programming problems respectively, our benchmark features a more balanced distribution
across each domain.

In addition, NCB include more data types. Furthermore, NCB focuses on assessing the model’s
ability to handle multiple file formats, a type of data that is both very commonly used in daily life
and relatively challenging to process. We note that the problems involving files have fewer test cases,
since GPT-4 still struggles to fully generate various types of file . This is also more challenging for
human annotators to design compared to simpler data types.

On the other hand, NCB is also limited by its size due to the high costs of problems collection
and the construction of the evaluation framework. We are continuously working on expanding our
benchmark.

4 Experiments

4.1 Setup

We conducted comprehensive evaluations of 33 popular state-of-the-art models. For proprietary
models, our focus was on OpenAI’s GPT-4-Turbo-0125, GPT-4-Turbo-1106, GPT-4, GPT-3.5-Turbo,
Anthropic’s Claude-2, ZhipuAI’s CodeGeeX3. In the case of open-source models, we performed
evaluations using the vLLM [31] and FastChat [69] framework. Our evaluation primarily utilizes
pass@k [13] as the metric to accurately assess the functional correctness of code generated by these
models. For k equal to 1, we employ greedy-search decoding. For random sampling, we demonstrate
the best pass@k results of the best-performing models with each LLM family for each k ∈ {10, 50},
where the sampling temperature is set to 0.2 and topp to 0.9.

Our semi-automated pipeline is capable of reducing the time required for benchmark construction
without compromising the quality of test cases. This paper primarily focuses on evaluating the
efficiency of benchmark construction and the quality of test cases. Specifically, we adopt code
coverage [26], a widely used metric for assessing the effectiveness of testing, as the criterion for
evaluating the quality of test cases. We invite five programming experts, each tasked with constructing
the same five problems. Initially, we ask each expert to manually write a standard solution and 5 test
cases. Subsequently, for the same problems, they complete the writing of standard solutions and test
cases using the semi-automated pipeline. As it is challenging to ensure identical test case coverage,
we require that the test cases written under both methods should not have a code coverage of less
than 80%. Then, for the sake of convenient comparison, we calculate the scores for each construction

6

NCB (zh)

NCB (en)

NCB Total HumanEval ∆Rank

Python Java Total Python Java Total Score Rank Score Rank

Model

GPT-4 [45]

GPT-4-Turbo-0125 [45]

GPT-4-Turbo-1106 [45]

GPT-3.5-Turbo [46]

Claude-3-Opus [5]

Claude-3-Sonnet [5]

Claude-3-Haiku [5]

Claude-2.1 [4]

Size

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

API LLMs

53.4

51.4

47.3

39.7

45.0

44.6

41.3

33.6

51.1 52.3

58.6 55.0

51.9 49.6

38.9 39.3

50.4 47.7

35.5 40.1

35.9 38.6

32.8 33.2

55.7

48.6

51.9

42.0

48.9

40.5

36.9

34.4

51.1 53.4

52.8

51.4 50.0

52.5

55.0 53.5

51.5

42.0 42.0

40.7

48.9 48.9

48.3

35.1 37.8

38.9

30.5 33.7

36.2

36.6 35.5

34.4

ChatGLM-4 [68; 19]

N/A

43.5

45.3 44.4

41.5

45.3 43.4

43.9

Gemini-1.5-Pro [10]

N/A

41.5

43.1 42.3

45.0

39.7 42.3

42.3

1

2

3

8

4

9

11

13

5

7

80.5

87.2

81.7

65.2

84.9

73.0

75.9

71.2

72.6

71.9

CodeGeeX3 [70]

N/A

29.0

29.0 29.0

36.6

32.8 34.7

31.9

18

69.5

Deepseek-Coder-Instruct [23]

Llama-3-Instruct [2]

Deepseek-Chat [15]

Codellama-Instruct [51]

Open LLMs

33B

6.7B

1.3B

70B

8B

44.3

38.9

18.3

39.1

35.9

38.9 41.6

29.8 34.4

24.4 21.4

34.4 36.7

21.5 28.7

44.3

35.9

27.5

35.4

19.7

44.3 44.3

43.0

35.9 35.9

35.1

25.2 26.4

23.9

39.7 37.5

37.1

21.7 20.7

24.7

67B

35.9

28.2 32.1

35.1

33.6 34.4

33.2

7B

3.8

12.2

8.0

8.4

19.1 13.8

10.9

70B

34B

13B

7B

35.1

23.7

20.6

16.8

32.1 33.6

17.6 20.7

16.8 18.7

17.6 17.2

32.8

28.2

26.7

21.4

30.5 31.7

32.6

17.6 22.9

21.8

19.1 22.9

20.8

17.6 19.5

18.4

Phind-Codellama [49]

34B

34.4

29.0 31.7

33.6

32.1 32.9

32.3

Qwen-1.5 [9]

110B 35.4

28.2 31.8

38.5

26.7 32.6

32.2

Qwen-Chat [8]

WizardCoder [41]

72B

7B

34B

15B

28.2

11.5

24.4

29.0

29.8 29.0

13.0 12.3

22.9 23.7

17.6 23.3

24.4

16.0

29.8

25.2

29.0 26.7

27.9

11.5 13.8

13.0

22.1 26.0

24.8

19.1 22.2

22.7

StarCoder [33]

15.5B 13.0

13.0 13.0

16.8

9.9

13.4

13.2

Mistral-Instruct [28]

CodeGen2 [43]

Phi [34]

CodeGen [44]

7B

16B

7B

3.7B

1B

2.7B

1.3B

16B

6B

2B

7.6

0.8

2.3

0.0

0.0

5.3

0.0

0.8

0.0

0.0

9.9

8.8

11.5

19.1 15.3

12.0

11.5

5.3

0.0

0.0

3.1

0.8

5.3

0.0

0.0

6.2

3.8

0.0

0.0

4.2

0.4

3.1

0.0

0.0

2.3

6.9

0.0

0.0

3.1

3.8

0.3

2.3

2.3

13.0

5.3

3.1

0.0

5.3

0.0

9.2

3.8

3.8

7.7

6.1

1.6

0.0

4.2

1.9

4.8

3.1

3.1

6.9

5.0

0.8

0.0

4.2

1.2

3.9

1.5

1.5

6

12

22

10

21

14

30

15

24

25

26

16

17

19

28

20

23

27

29

31

32

38

39

33

37

34

35

36

79.3

78.6

65.2

81.7

62.2

78.3

48.2

72.0

51.8

42.7

34.8

71.3

52.4

64.6

37.2

73.2

59.8

40.8

28.7

19.5

18.3

15.9

11.0

53.7

41.4

32.9

29.3

24.4

5

1

3

18

2

11

9

16

12

14

17

6

7

19

4

21

8

26

13

25

26

31

15

24

20

30

10

22

29

34

36

37

38

39

23

28

32

33

35

4

-1

0

10

-2

2

-2

3

7

7

-1

0

-5

-3

-6

0

-6

-4

-2

1

1

5

-1

7

1

2

-10

-1

2

5

5

5

0

0

-10

-9

-2

-2

-1

Table 3: Evaluating LLMs on the test set of NATURALCODEBENCH. All results are pass@1 on
greedy decoding. Dev set results are reported in Table 6. Compared to HumanEval [13], some LLMs
present significant variations

7

Hand-Written

Semi-Automated

Time Cost

Line

Branch

Score

Time Cost

Line

Branch

Score

Expert_1
Expert_2
Expert_3
Expert_4
Expert_5

Total/Avg.

179.5
195.0
145.0
180.0
180.0

175.9

97.6
97.6
84.5
90.9
98.1

93.7

95.9
95.0
84.0
100.0
83.3

91.6

10.8
9.9
11.6
10.6
10.1

10.5

36.0
41.0
26.0
41.0
56.0

40.0

97.0
88.1
82.0
84.4
100.0

90.3

96.9
91.7
85.0
91.7
100.0

93.1

53.9
43.9
64.2
42.9
35.7

48.1

Table 4: Test case construction comparison between by Semi-Automated Pipeline and Hand-Written

method in a straightforward manner, which is outlined as follows:

Score =

LineCov. + BranchCov.
T imeCost

∗ 10

4.2 Results of LLMs

Table 3 and Table 6 shows the pass@1 results on the test set and dev set of NCB, respectively.
Considering the high consistency of results, we primarily analyze the results on the test set. As
expected, OpenAI’s GPT-4 achieves the highest score of 52.8%. The performance of GPT-4-Turbo is
very close to that of GPT-4, differing only by 1.3% , with GPT-4-Turbo performing better in Java
but showing a larger difference in Python. Among the open-source models, DeepSeek-Coder-33B-
Instruct performs the best, reaching a score of 43.0%. However, the 9.8% score gap with GPT-4
remains significant. On the other hand, it surpasses the 40.7% achieved by GPT-3.5, exceeding it by
2.3%. In summary, the performance of state-of-the-art open-source models is now between GPT-3.5
and GPT-4, yet the majority of open-source models still do not match the performance of GPT-3.5.

When compared to a perfect score of 100%, it is observed that even the best-performing model,
GPT-4, still falls significantly short. This is in contrast to its performance in HumanEval, where it has
approached 90%.

Comparing the performance of models in Chinese and English versions, it is evident that the vast
majority of models perform better in English. This holds true even for the top models, GPT-4 and
GPT-4-Turbo, which outperform their average scores in Chinese by 1.1% and 3.9%, respectively.

Furthermore, Table 3 systematically presents the performance of various open-source models at
different scales. Models smaller than 10B scored between 0.0% and 23.9%, models between 10B
and 30B scored between 3.9% and 35.1%, models between 30B and 60B scored between 21.8% and
43.0%, and models larger than 60B scored between 27.9% and 33.2%. It is evident that the scale of
the model still has a significant impact on performance. Larger models generally outperform smaller
models, indicating that increasing scale can indeed enhance a model’s capabilities. However, this
is not to say that scale is everything; more refined data and training strategies can also significantly
impact a model’s performance. Some smaller models, such as DeepSeek-Coder-6.7B-Instruct, can
outperform those larger than 30B by approximately 2.8% and those larger than 60B by approximately
1.9%.

Table 5 shows the pass@k results of best-performing LLMs with each LLM family on NCB,
where k ∈ {10, 50}. We found that under random sampling, the scores of some models increased
significantly. For instance, Codellama-70B-Instruct, unlike its performance on pass@1, clearly
outperformed GPT-3.5 on both Pass@10 and Pass@50.

We compared the Python scores on the test set of NCB with the performances of models on Hu-
maneval, as shown in the Figure 1. Most models are located in the upper triangular area of the graph,
with many models scoring high on Humaneval but exhibiting relatively lower performance on NCB.

4.3 Performance mismatch on HumanEval and NCB

We show the rank orders of all tested LLMs in Table 3 with regard to HumanEval and NCB, as well
as the difference of rank orders. We also plot the corresponding performances on two benchmarks to
scatter diagram in Figure 1. Based on the table and figure, we have some interesting findings.

8

Performances of most LLMs on two benchmarks grow linearly proportional, and the differences of
scores’ rank order are around 0. It demonstrates that NCB can indeed reflect the coding abilities of
LLMs as HumanEval does in most cases.

However, we observe that some model series, notably the Phi, Deepseek-Chat, and WizardCoder,
consistently exhibit a propensity to achieve superior rankings on the Humaneval dataset as opposed
to the NCB across various scales, as shown in the Table 3. Additional model families, including
CodeGen and Llama-3-Instruct, similarly display the trend, though to a reduced degree.

There might be a few potential hypotheses for the observation. First, as problems in NCB are more
difficult and derived from natural user prompts, compared to those in HumanEval, LLMs with poorer
generalization and instruction-following capabilities tend to perform worse. We find in preliminary
experiments that problems in NCB cannot be properly solved by pre-trained base LLMs via mere
in-context learning as HumanEval does, which indicates that to solve NCB problems requires stronger
alignment and generalizability than HumanEval needs.

Second, it is possible that training sets of some LLMs are over-specifiedly optimized for HumanEval-
style problems. On one hand, pre-training data of certain LLMs may be contaminated. As GPT-4 [45]
reported, 25% of HumanEval has been contaminated in their pre-training corpus. On the other hand,
instruction fine-tuning dataset may also be polluted. For example, Phi [34] reports a considerable
amount of synthetic prompts resonating to some test samples in HumanEval. In [64], the authors
report leakage unidentifiable by n-gram overlap when using popular rephrasing techniques to create
training sets. The performance discrepancy between HumanEval and NCB in our experiments is also
an evidence of the potential contamination.

4.4 Results of Semi-automated Construction

In Table 4, we can observe that the coverage of hand-written test cases is almost identical to that
of test cases constructed through a semi-automatic pipeline, yet the time required for the former
significantly exceeds the time needed for constructing test cases via the semi-automatic pipeline.
Specifically, test cases can be constructed via the semi-automated pipeline in just 40 minutes, whereas
manual writing requires 175.9 minutes, a difference of more than 4x. Consequently, the scores
obtained for test cases constructed using the semi-automated pipeline are far higher than those for
manually written test cases, with an average difference of 37.6. In summary, constructing test cases
through the semi-automatic framework can achieve significantly higher efficiency without substantial
loss in quality compared to manual writing.

5 Related Work

LLMs for code. Significant advancements in LLMs (57, 18, 11) are transforming everyday life,
particularly in the field of coding, driven by the vast amount of openly available codebases and
the push to enhance productivity among developers. Code-specific LLMs have proven their ability
to perform various tasks such as code generation (13, 27, 35), program repair (29, 58, 60, 61),
automated testing (16, 17, 39, 59, 63), code translation (52, 53) and code summarization (1, 40).
Notably, prominent LLMs including CODEX [13], CodeGen [44], INCODER [22], and PolyCoder
[62] have been developed and rigorously tested, particularly in code generation. This area, often
referred to as the ultimate goal in computer science research since the early days of AI in the 1950s,
involves the model producing code snippets from natural language explanations of the required
functionality. The landscape of code LLMs is currently experiencing a surge, with new models being
introduced regularly. This includes both proprietary ones (42, 45) and open-source ones (36, 44, 55,
33, 3, 54), marking a trend of frequent releases in this domain.

Code Synthesis Benchmarks. As the capabilities of models advance, researchers are developing
more challenging and versatile benchmarks for code generation. Initially, the earlier focus was on
domain-specific languages [67], while the subsequent effort launched a Text-to-SQL benchmark to
evaluate the capacity for generating comprehensive SQL programs [66]. A investigation [65] assesses
the ability to compose brief yet broadly applicable Python snippets. More recent studies (25, 35)
have tested models’ proficiency in solving competitive programming challenges using Python. A
leading and extensively researched benchmark in this domain is HumanEval [13], which features 164
Python function signatures accompanied by docstrings and corresponding test cases for validating

9

correctness. Additionally, each problem in HumanEval includes a reference solution. The MBPP
[7] dataset, another Python-centric collection, was developed by having participants contribute 974
programming challenges. Each challenge encompasses a problem description (i.e., docstring), a
function signature, and three test cases. There are also benchmarks for other programming languages,
such as HumanEval-X [70] for C++, JavaScript, and Go, CodeContests [35] for C++ and Java, and
MultiPL-E [12], which expands HumanEval and MBPP to 18 languages.

More recent efforts have introduced benchmarks that more closely mirror real-world coding scenarios
that require interactive coding. For example, AgentBench [38] introduces interactive tasks regarding
unix shell and MySQL. SWE-Bench [30] compiles GitHub issues, their associated codebases, and
tests, to gauge LLMs’ effectiveness in practical software engineering tasks.

6 Conclusion

We propose NATURALCODEBENCH for evaluating the code generating ability of LLMs. Our
benchmark comprises a total of 402 problems selected from coding online services, and it supports
automatic evaluation of code generated by LLMs. We have also proposed a semi-automated pipeline
for efficiently constructing the entire benchmark, achieving an efficiency gain of more than 4x
compared to manual construction. We hope that NCB can provide a fair environment for the
comparison between models, and our pipline can also provide inspiration to other complex tasks or
domains where evaluation costs are high.

Limitations

Here, we discuss several limitations of this work.

To cover more domains. Although our problems are derived from real-world application scenarios,
due to the difficulty of constructing accurate and efficient evaluation environments, we are unable to
test some types of problems, such as those involving interface creation, web services, etc., which
are also common problem types in actual applications. This results in some biases in our evaluation,
which may affect the accuracy of the evaluation of certain models. We will leave these issues for
future research.

To reduce the cost. The semi-automated pipeline can significantly reduce the time and human
resources required to construct an evaluation framework, but the cost of accessing OpenAI’s API
remains expensive, and it does not completely eliminate the use of human resources.