---
paper_id: 2409.05816
source: arxiv
title: Improving Pretraining Data Using Perplexity Correlations
converted_at: 2026-03-17T07:40:30.991503
note: "Content extracted before References section"
---

5
2
0
2

r
a

M
0
1

]
L
C
.
s
c
[

2
v
6
1
8
5
0
.
9
0
4
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

IMPROVING PRETRAINING DATA USING
PERPLEXITY CORRELATIONS

Tristan Thrush, Christopher Potts & Tatsunori Hashimoto

Department of Computer Science

Stanford University

Stanford, CA 94305, USA

{tthrush,cgpotts,thashim}@stanford.edu

ABSTRACT

Quality pretraining data is often seen as the key to high-performance language
models. However, progress in understanding pretraining data has been slow
due to the costly pretraining runs required for data selection experiments. We
present a framework that avoids these costs and selects high-quality pretraining
data without any LLM training of our own. Our work is based on a simple
observation: LLM losses on many pretraining texts are correlated with down-
stream benchmark performance, and selecting high-correlation documents is an
effective pretraining data selection method. We build a new statistical frame-
work for data selection centered around estimates of perplexity-benchmark cor-
relations and perform data selection using a sample of 90 LLMs taken from
the Open LLM Leaderboard on texts from tens of thousands of web domains.
In controlled pretraining experiments at the 160M parameter scale on 8 bench-
marks, our approach outperforms DSIR on every benchmark, while matching
the best data selector found in DataComp-LM, a hand-engineered bigram clas-
sifier. We have now also updated this paper to include results from preregistered
experiments with new pretraining data on an aggregation of 22 benchmarks up
to the 1.4B scale, showing increasing improvements of our method over others
with more scale. A pip package with full documentation can be found here:
https://github.com/TristanThrush/perplexity-correlations.

1

INTRODUCTION

Dataset curation is increasingly crucial for training high-quality large language models (LLMs). As
pretraining datasets have grown, from under 200B tokens in 2020 (Raffel et al., 2020; Gao et al.,
2020) to 240T tokens today (Li et al., 2024), it has become critical to identify subsets of the available
data that will lead to the best LLMs, and a wide range of methods have arisen to meet these needs
(Ilyas et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2023a;b; Engstrom et al., 2024; Everaert & Potts, 2024; Liu et al.,
2024; Llama Team, 2024). However, data-driven approaches to data selection typically involve
expensive model retraining steps that limit their effectiveness, and no algorithm has been reported
to consistently beat or match hand-crafted classifiers for data selection (Li et al., 2024).

Is training new LLMs necessary for data selection? Instead of training our own models, can we use
the growing collection of publicly available, high-performance LLMs (Wolf et al., 2019; Beeching
et al., 2023) to perform data valuation and selection? This would have significant benefits: we
could leverage the millions of dollars collectively spent on building these LLMs, and we would
have coverage over a large, heterogeneous collection of high-performance models varying in size,
architectures, and pretraining data distribution.

Despite these advantages, using existing models for pretraining data selection is challenging, as the
training data for these models are often unknown and heterogeneous. Our key observation is that
data selection can be done using two observable features of all public models today: 1) all open-
weight models produce a causal language modeling loss for a given text, and 2) all of them can be

1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Domains

Benchmark

bbc arxiv · · · willys-hifi

SciQ

s
M
L
L

Mistral

Llama

Mamba

...

...

...

Pythia

· · ·

· · ·

· · ·
. . .
· · ·

...

...

logprob

accuracy

Correlations

bbc arxiv · · · willys-hifi

· · ·

High Corr (Keep)
arxiv, bbc, · · ·

Low Corr (Discard)
willys-hifi, · · ·

Figure 1: We pretrain on domains where lower loss is generally correlated with higher downstream
performance. Our approach does this by taking public, pretrained LLMs and measuring correlations
across their log-likelihoods (left, red matrix) and performance on a target benchmark (center, blue
vector). We then perform data selection by training a fastText classifier that distinguishes high cor-
relation domains from others. This approach is on par with the best-known data selection methods
in our experiments, despite requiring no human selection of high-quality domains.

evaluated on benchmarks. Prior work has found systematic relationships between web corpus loss
and benchmark performance (Wei et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2024), which suggests the possibility of
using correlations between perplexity and benchmark scores as the basis for a data selection policy.

In the present paper, we pursue this possibility and find a radically simple approach that is also
effective: we select data via perplexity correlations (Figure 1), where we select data domains (e.g.
wikipedia.org, stackoverflow.com, etc.) for which LLM log-probabilities are highly correlated with
downstream benchmark performance. To enable our approach, we complement our algorithm with
a statistical framework for correlation-based data selection and derive correlation estimators that
perform well over our heterogeneous collection of LLMs.

We validate our approach using a collection of pretrained causal LLMs on the Hugging Face Open
LLM Leaderboard (Beeching et al., 2023) and find that perplexity correlations are predictive of an
LLM’s benchmark performance. Importantly, we find that these relationships are robust enough to
enable reliable data selection that targets downstream benchmarks. In controlled pretraining experi-
ments at the 160M parameter scale on eight benchmarks, our approach strongly outperforms DSIR
(Xie et al., 2023b) (a popular training-free data selection approach based on n-gram statistics) while
generally matching the performance of the best method validated at scale by Li et al. (the OH-2.5
+ELI5 fastText classifier; Joulin et al. 2016) without any parameter tuning or human curation. In
followup experiments at the 160M to 1.4B parameter scale which we pre-registered, our approach
outperforms the best Li et al. filter on the main benchmark from their paper (an aggregate of 22
benchmarks) when filtering from their base data pool, and both approaches remain close to each
other when filtering from their extensively pre-filtered pool. We further find that the performance of
our approach strengthens with increasing scale.

2 RELATED WORK

To go beyond the status quo of deduplication, perplexity filtering, and hand-curation (Laurençon
et al., 2022; BigScience, 2023; Marion et al., 2023; Abbas et al., 2023; Groeneveld et al., 2024;
Soldaini et al., 2024; Penedo et al., 2024; Llama Team, 2024), targeted methods have been proposed
to filter pretraining data so that the resulting LLM will achieve higher scores on given benchmarks.
There are lightweight approaches that use n-gram overlap (Xie et al., 2023b) or embedding similarity
(Everaert & Potts, 2024) to select training data that is similar to data from a given benchmark. There
are also less-scalable methods that require training proxy LLMs on different data mixtures (Ilyas
et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2023a; Engstrom et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024; Llama Team, 2024).

Given the high costs of proxy-based data selection methods, they have primarily been used to select
among human-curated pretraining data mixtures (Llama Team, 2024; Li et al., 2024) rather than
a high dimensional space of mixtures. Our work takes an orthogonal approach and builds upon
recent observational studies that have found scaling relationships that hold across collections of
uncontrolled and diverse LLMs (Owen, 2024; Ruan et al., 2024). While these studies do not examine

2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

loss-to-performance relationships or derive useful data selection methods from them, we know that
losses and performance are generally highly correlated. Validation losses on samples of text corpora
are commonly used as a proxy for downstream performance when comparing LLMs pretrained on
the same data distribution (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022), even if they
have different architectures (Poli et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2023; Gu & Dao, 2024).

According to a recent survey of data selection approaches by Li et al. (2024), the heavier-weight
pretraining data selection methods have not shown large gains, and the current state-of-the-art across
many tasks is primitive: a fixed fastText classifier (Joulin et al., 2016) combined with an English filter
as a final layer after extensive deduplication and filtering. Are we missing important information that
we can efficiently extract from a diverse collection of already trained models, larger and more diverse
than any single organization is likely to produce? We show evidence supporting this hypothesis –
simple loss-performance correlation coefficients are effective when used for data selection.

3 PROBLEM SETTING

Our goal is to build predictive models of how pretraining data distributions affect downstream bench-
mark performance and use them to build better language models. Unfortunately, this task is challeng-
ing and computationally expensive. A standard approach adopted in paradigms such as datamodel-
ing (Ilyas et al., 2022) is to obtain N different pretraining distributions {pi : i ∈ [N ], pi ∈ R+
}
0
over D ≫ N domains (e.g. arxiv.org, stackoverflow.com, etc.), pretrain and measure model errors
on a target benchmark yi ∈ [0, 1], and fit a model p → y. This approach requires N LLM training
runs, performed at a scale sufficient to obtain non-random performance on y. This can cost tens to
hundreds of millions of dollars for hard benchmarks such as MMLU, where even the performance
of 1B parameter LLMs often does not exceed random chance (Beeching et al., 2023).

D

Instead, our work considers the following observational setting that requires no training. We obtain
N pretrained, high-performance LLMs that vary in pretraining data, tokenizer, architecture, and
scale (i.e. models on Hugging Face’s OpenLLM leaderboard). If we could train a predictor p → y
on these N models, we could avoid large scale model training. Unfortunately, this is impossible as
the training data for these models is often proprietary, and so we have no knowledge of p.

The key observation of our work is that we can replace pi,j (the unobserved sampling probability of
model i’s data selection policy on document j) with an observable surrogate xi,j, which is the nega-
tive log-likelihood of document j under model i.1 We can then build a regression model that relates
negative log-likelihood xi and benchmark error yi. Using this model, we can select pretraining data
from domains j for which decreasing the loss xi,j is predicted to rapidly decrease error yi.

The perplexity-performance hypothesis. We formulate the task of predicting errors yi from nega-
tive log-probabilities xi as a single-index model (SIM),

yi = f (⟨θ∗, xi⟩ + ϵi)

(1)

where f : R (cid:55)→ R is some unknown monotonically increasing univariate function, ϵi is zero-mean
noise which is independent of x, and θ∗ ∈ RD are unknown weights over D domains.

A single index model is highly flexible (due to the arbitrary, monotone f ) and has the advantage that
we do not need to estimate the nonlinear function f if our goal is to optimize model performance.
We can see this directly from the monotonicity of f as

⟨θ∗, xi⟩ + ϵi < ⟨θ∗, xj⟩ + ϵj ⇐⇒ f (⟨θ∗, xi⟩ + ϵi) < f (⟨θ∗, xj⟩ + ϵj).

(2)

Data selection from perplexity correlations. The weights θ∗ tell us which domain perplexities
are correlated with downstream performance. However, this isn’t sufficient for data selection. Even
if we know how model likelihoods relate to model performance, we do not know how data selec-
tion affects likelihoods. Even worse, this data mixture to likelihood relationship cannot be learned
observationally, as we do not know the data mixture of any of our models.

1To be precise, we use bits-per-byte, which normalizes the sequence negative log-likelihood with the number
of UTF-8 bytes. This is defined in terms of the length of the string in tokens LT , the length of the string in
UTF-8 bytes LB, and the cross entropy loss ℓ as BPB = LT ℓ

LB ln(2)

3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Despite this, we show that there is a clean approach for optimizing the data mixture. Our core
observation is the following: if we find a nonnegative θ∗, sampling proportional to θ∗ is always a
good choice. More formally, we see that this sampling distribution defines the pretraining loss such
that optimizing the training loss directly optimizes the downstream task via the single index model.

Proposition 1 Suppose that θ∗ weights are non-negative. Then, for models with associated like-
lihoods x ∈ X ⊂ RD, the minimizer of the pretraining loss over the θ∗ sampling distribution
Ej∼θ∗ [xj] also has the lowest expected downstream error according to the single index model:

arg min
x∈X

Ej∼θ∗ [xj] = arg min

x∈X

E[f (⟨θ∗, x⟩ + ϵ)].

This observation follows directly from the fact that we can normalize any non-negative θ∗ into a
distribution (and shift the normalization constant into f ) which allows us to write the inner product
in the single-index model as a monotone function of the expected pretraining loss:

y = f (⟨θ∗, x⟩ + ϵ) = f (Ej∼θ∗[xj] + ϵ).

(3)

Proposition 1 allows us to entirely avoid the task of finding the optimal data mixture for a target
likelihood. Instead, we pick sampling distributions that make the pretraining loss a monotone func-
tion of the predicted downstream error. Afterward, we can rely on our ability to optimize the loss to
optimize downstream performance.

This view gives us a straightforward roadmap for data selection in the remainder of the paper:
estimate a set of domains where loss and downstream benchmark performance is highly correlated,
and then constrain our θ∗ estimates to be a pretraining data sampling distribution.

4 METHODS

We now describe the details of our approach, starting by presenting the algorithm itself and the
intuitions behind it, followed by a more precise and mathematical justification for the various steps.

4.1 ALGORITHM

Estimating θ∗. The parameter θ∗
j and downstream performance. Because of this, we might naturally expect θ∗
nonlinear correlation coefficients between x and y. Our work uses a simple correlation measure,

j measures the relationship between log-likelihoods in domain
j to be related to

(cid:88)

γj =

1≤k,l≤n
k̸=l

sign(yk − yl)(rankj(xk,j) − rankj(xl,j))

where rankj(x) is the rank of x among {x1,j . . . xN,j}. This formula is intuitive: when model k
does better than model l, what percentile is model k’s log-likelihood compared to model l’s? The
functional form also has the benefit of being a principled estimate of θ∗. In particular, we show in
sections below that in expectation, the ranking of domains in γ exactly matches that of θ∗ (under
standard high-dimensional regression assumptions; see Section 4.2 for a complete discussion). We
note, though, that this is not the only correlation coefficient that performs well in our perplexity
correlations toolkit (see Appendix H) and we prove that Spearman’s rank correlation (Spearman,
1904) is principled in the same way (see Appendix C).

Selecting pretraining data. Suppose that we have an accurate estimate γj which is nonnegative. In
this case, we could use γj directly as a data selection procedure and Proposition 1 would ensure that
minimizing the population pretraining loss minimizes downstream errors. Unfortunately, γj can be
negative and the finite number of tokens per domain can make it difficult to minimize the population
pretraining loss. Thus, we must project γj onto the set of reasonable pretraining data distributions
that are nonnegative and account for the per-domain token counts.

What is a good way to project a set of domain rankings estimated via γ into a pretraining sampling
distribution? Intuitively, if wikipedia.org has a γj = 0.5 and arxiv.org is γk = 0.9, it would be nat-
ural to select tokens in order of γ, preferring tokens from arxiv.org over tokens from wikipedia.org.

Having established the ordering of domains, the remaining question is how many tokens we take for
each domain. We follow recent observations that repeating data degrades performance (Abbas et al.,

4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

2023) to arrive at a simple selection algorithm: select domains in greatest to least γ, taking all the
tokens in each domain once, until we exhaust our total pretraining token budget.

Full algorithm. Together, these steps result in a simple, parameter-free algorithm that calculates
our rank correlation coefficient, and selects domains in order from largest to smallest coefficient.
We show this process explicitly with pseudocode in Algorithm 1 (see Appendix A), and additionally
show an extra step where we train a fastText (Joulin et al., 2016) classifier (using standard settings
and bigram features from Li et al. 2024) which distinguishes our selected documents and domains
from the rest of the pool. The fastText classifier allows us to perform data selection at a single-
page level, and scale the selection process to larger datasets. We also found the classifier to slightly
improve downstream performance over directly selecting the documents. More information on the
specifics of the data selection approaches that we tested is given in Appendix G.

4.2 THEORY

We now study the approach closely and show that our choices for the correlation coefficient and
projection step are extensions of the classic, high-dimensional single index model estimator of Plan
et al. (2016). We describe the basic single-index model estimators first, describe our extensions,
and then conclude with a discussion on how our estimator and results deviate from the theory. A
discussion of other potential estimation paradigms is provided in Appendix E.

4.2.1 HIGH-DIMENSIONAL ESTIMATION OF SINGLE INDEX MODELS

For our theory, we consider the standard high-dimensional regression setting of Plan et al. (2016)
and Chen & Banerjee (2017). Here, our goal is to estimate the unknown weights θ∗ in a single-index
model yi = f (⟨θ∗, xi⟩ + ϵi), with xi ∼ N (0, I) for ∥θ∗∥2 = 1 (assumed without loss of generality,
as ∥θ∗∥2 can be absorbed by f ).

Our starting point is the classic result of Plan et al. (2016), who showed

E [ykxk] = cθ∗,
for some positive constant c and 1 ≤ k ≤ N . Closely related is the result of Chen & Banerjee
(2017), who developed a robust estimator quite similar to ours,

(4)

E [sign(yk − yl)(xk − xl)] = βθ∗
for any 1 ≤ k, l ≤ N (where k ̸= l) and some positive constant β. Both of these results clearly iden-
tify that for the high-dimensional single-index model in the Gaussian setting, generalized correlation
coefficients provide consistent estimates of the true regression coefficient θ∗.

(5)

4.2.2 DERIVING OUR ESTIMATOR

Both Plan et al. and Chen & Banerjee provide moment-matching style estimators that consistently
recover θ∗ in high-dimensional, sparse settings. However, we found that both estimators directly
use the values of x, and this resulted in brittle estimates due to outliers in language model log-
likelihoods. While outlier removal is one possibility, we found that a simpler approach was to
robustify the estimator of Chen & Banerjee (2017) to outliers in x.

Recall that our estimate γ is a U-statistic, defined as pairwise sums of

sign(yi − yj)(Φ(xi) − Φ(xj)),
for any 1 ≤ i, j ≤ N (where i ̸= j), where Φ is the empirical CDF (effectively, normalized ranks)
of the x values. This estimate is significantly less sensitive to outliers than that of Chen & Banerjee
(2017), as the empirical CDF is bounded between zero and one.

(6)

We study this estimate theoretically in the Gaussian setting, where we consider the asymptotically
equivalent estimator with Φ as the CDF of the standard Gaussian. In this case, we can show that this
modified estimator is also consistent in recovering θ∗.

Theorem 1 When ϵ ∼ N (0, σ2), we have:

E[sign(yi − yj)(Φ(xi) − Φ(xj))] =

2
π

sin−1

(cid:18)

θ∗
1 + σ2

√

2

(cid:19)

.

(7)

5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

The proof is in Appendix B. Because we assume ||θ∗||2 = 1 and the expected value in Equation 7
must be in [−1, 1], we are always in the domain of sin−1 and can invert it. After inverting, we get:

ˆθ ∝ sin

(cid:16) π
2

√

(cid:17)
E [sign(yi − yj)(Φ(xi) − Φ(xj))]

(8)

as an estimate for θ∗, where the constant 2

1 + σ2 term due to noise has been dropped.

Beyond the fact that our estimator is consistent, we can show an even tighter connection to the Chen
& Banerjee estimator: our estimates agree when running the original estimator on rank-transformed
data. More specifically, for two models xi and xj with the estimated model rankings ⟨ ˆθ, xi⟩ >
⟨ ˆθ, xj⟩, the expected ranking under rank-transformation (i.e. Φ(x)) matches this ranking.

Corollary 1 Suppose that ˆθ is any vector of fixed weights and x ∼ N (0, I). Then, conditioning on
the event ⟨ ˆθ, xi⟩ < ⟨ ˆθ, xj⟩, we have with probability 1 that:

⟨ ˆθ, E[Φ(xi) | ⟨ ˆθ, xi⟩ < ⟨ ˆθ, xj⟩]⟩ < ⟨ ˆθ, E[Φ(xj) | ⟨ ˆθ, xi⟩ < ⟨ ˆθ, xj⟩]⟩.

(9)

This proof follows from the same calculations as Theorem 1 and is given in Appendix B.

4.2.3 SELECTING DATA FOR PRETRAINING

Recall that our algorithm for data selection is to constrain γ to be a valid sampling distribution
and then sample directly from this estimate. For now, we focus on constraining ˆθ, and we will
see at the end of this section that we can apply the same constraint to γ directly to get the same
result. The theory of constrained estimation for ˆθ is simple and well-understood, with both Plan
et al. (2016) and Chen & Banerjee (2017) extensively studying the problem of estimating ˆθ under a
known convex constraint set C. In particular, Plan et al. (2016) show that performing a L2 projection
via ˆθproj = arg minθ∈C ∥θ − ˆθ∥2 provides improved convergence rates that depend on the Gaussian
mean width of C rather than the ambient dimension, and Chen & Banerjee (2017) show similar
results when maximizing the linear correlation ˆθproj = arg minθ∈C⊆BD −⟨θ, ˆθ⟩.
We take a similar approach here. We define a convex constraint set C that forces ˆθ to be a reasonable
sampling distribution and find the best sampling distribution via the linear correlation approach.

We define C as the combination of two sets of constraints. First, we must have a valid sampling
distribution, so we constrain ˆθ to lie in the simplex. As we noted above, it is well-known that
duplicating data harms performance (Abbas et al., 2023), so we constrain ˆθ to avoid this by limiting
the maximum weight on domains: if we will pretrain on m tokens overall, we enforce θ∗
i ≤ τi, ∀i ∈
[1, D], where τi is set so τim is the number of tokens from the i-th domain accessible for training.
The resulting linear program has a simple solution and takes the form of initializing ˆθproj to 0 and
then iterating through the values in ˆθ from largest to smallest, setting the value at the corresponding
index of ˆθproj to the maximum allowable value, until ˆθproj sums to 1 (see Appendix D for a proof).

Theorem 2 Suppose we want to solve:

subject to:

ˆθproj = arg min
θ∈RD

−⟨θ, ˆθ⟩,

D
(cid:88)

i=1

θi = 1

0 ≤ θi ≤ τi, ∀i ∈ [1, D],

where τi > 0 are fixed values. Then, the solution is:

ˆθproj
k =






τk
1 − (cid:80)
0

j: rj (ˆθj )>rk(ˆθk) τj

if (cid:80)
if (cid:80)
otherwise

j: rj (ˆθj )≥rk(ˆθk) τj ≤ 1
j: rj (ˆθj )≥rk(ˆθk) τj ≥ 1 ∧ (cid:80)

j: rj (ˆθj )>rk(ˆθk) τj ≤ 1

, (10)

where r breaks ties between ˆθj and ˆθk for k ̸= j; otherwise r keeps ordinal relationships the same.

6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

We note that while the use of this linear program is in line with the constrained estimators proposed
in Chen & Banerjee (2017), the L2 projection is arguably more natural, and does not require assum-
ing that ∥ ˆθ∥2 = 1 for asymptotic recovery conditions. We derive similar closed-form expressions
for this quadratic case in Appendix D, but do not use this approach for two separate reasons. First,
the L2 projection depends on the L2 norm of ˆθ, unlike the linear program which only depends on
the ranks of the values in ˆθ. The challenge with determining the norm is that the exact recovery
result in Equation (7) requires knowledge of the noise level, and the trigonometric functions rely
strongly on the Gaussian structure of x. Because of this, we are unlikely to be able to estimate the
norm of ˆθ with any accuracy, and the only way to avoid this would be to treat the norm as a hyperpa-
rameter, which adds unnecessary complexity. The second reason is empirical (although possibly a
consequence of the first) – we found that the linear projection performed better across a wide range
of benchmarks and conditions (see Appendix H).

We conclude by relating our theory to the full algorithm in Section 4.1. The estimation step for γ
is the finite sample, U-estimate of the expectation in Equation (8), dropping the nonlinear transform
sin and π/2 as these two terms do not change the rankings of the domains. The data selection step
directly applies our projection in Equation (10), and we make use of the fact that this projection only
relies on rankings among the domains to use γ rather than an exact estimate for θ∗.

5 RESULTS

We first pretrain 160M-parameter LLMs from scratch to study our primary goal of selecting pretrain-
ing data to improve downstream performance, and then we present a brief overview of results on
experiments which we preregistered in an earlier version of this document (most experiments show
a trend of even greater improvements at larger scales – up to 1.4B parameters – on new benchmarks
and data pools; more detail is in Appendices N and M). Finally, we present an analysis on the ability
of losses to predict downstream performance. Throughout our experiments, we use single-index
models trained using Algorithm 1. As shown in the algorithm, we train the fastText classifier on
selected vs. unselected domains and use the classifier to filter the pretraining data at the page-level.

Input data matrix X. To build the input data matrix, X, we collected byte normalized loss values
from a sample of 90 Open LLM Leaderboard (Beeching et al., 2023) LLMs that we could run
LB ln(2) where LT is the token
without errors. Concretely, these values are defined as bits-per-byte
count, LB is the number of UTF-8 bytes, and ℓ is the per-token cross-entropy (Gao et al., 2020).
For our initial experiments, we collected these values on the “sample” subset2 of the RedPajama V2
(RPJv2) dataset (Together Computer, 2023) for all domains with ≥ 25 pages in the sample. There
are 9,841 domains/features. Specifics are in Appendix F. The data for the additional preregistered
experiments is discussed in Appendix N. A detailed principal components analysis of X, which
reveals a variety of salient embedded information in the losses, is in Appendix L.

LT ℓ

Target benchmark performance y. For our initial experiments, we constructed a target vector, y,
for LAMBADA (Paperno et al., 2016), ARC Easy (Clark et al., 2018), PIQA (Bisk et al., 2020), and
SciQ (Welbl et al., 2017). These are all of the tasks reported in the Pythia scaling experiments for
which a model in the 160M parameter range could meaningfully perform above chance. We also
constructed target vectors for LAMBADAIT, LAMBADAFR, LAMBADADE, and LAMBADAES,
which are subsets of LAMBADA translated into Italian, French, German, and Spanish by Black
(2023). These languages match those in RPJv2, where each page is conveniently tagged as one of
five languages: English, Spanish, French, German, and Italian. The correspondence between our
target benchmark languages and the RPJv2 metadata allows us to easily include language filtering
baselines. For the preregistered experiments, we use 22 more benchmarks (see Appendix N).

5.1

INITIAL PRETRAINING EXPERIMENTS

We begin by validating our algorithm in the end-to-end task of pretraining data selection with con-
trolled experiments at the 160M parameter, 3.2B token, scale. The low compute requirements of
this setting allow us to more extensively study replicates and ablations in Appendix H within the
timeframe of a few days. While 160M models are small, this is far from an easy setting for our data

2https://huggingface.co/datasets/togethercomputer/RedPajama-Data-V2

7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Table 1: Average rankings of data selection methods (lower is better) for 8 evals. Correlation-based
filtering beats baselines by a wide margin, and matches the current best open data filter from Li et al.
(2024). Our approach significantly beats the default filter in Li et al. (2024) and loses slightly after
additional manual language filtering that depends on the target task (+ manual Lang Filter).

Method None

Lang
Filt

DSIR
(Xie et al., 2023b)

Handcrafted fastText
+ EN Lang Filter
(Li et al., 2024)

Handcrafted fastText
w/o Lang Filter

Handcrafted fastText
+ manual Lang Filter

Perplexity
Correlations

Avg. Rank

3.750

4.000

4.500

3.750

3.250

1.375

1.750

selection algorithm. Most of the Open LLM Leaderboard models are 10 to 100× larger than the
160M scale, and our single index model must extrapolate substantially from ≈7B scale models to
our small-scale validation setting (see Appendix K for a histogram of model sizes).

Pretraining data and setting. For the initial pretraining experiments, we used the “sample-100B”
subset of RPJv2. This is much larger than the sample that we used to compute our estimate. We
filtered this data so it contains only the domains used for our estimate, and then tokenized the data
with the Pythia tokenizer. The vast majority of the domains from our BPB matrix were present in
this larger sample of text. However, 42 (out of 9,841) were not, and so we removed them from our
estimate. For every data selection method that we tested, the task was to further select 3.2B tokens
for pretraining, which is Chinchilla-optimal (Hoffmann et al., 2022) for the 160M-parameter LLM.

Baselines. We compare against several baseline data-selection methods. First, we present the results
of uniformly sampling from the available pretraining data. Then we use the language tags present
in RPJv2 to filter only for the language matching the target task. In addition to these commonsense
baselines, we also run DSIR (Xie et al., 2023b), a lightweight training data selection technique based
on n-gram overlaps that Li et al. (2024) found to be competitive with proxy LLM-based techniques
and was also validated at scale (Parmar et al., 2024). Finally, we run the state-of-the-art method
for pretraining data quality filtering found by Li et al., which is a fastText classifier that beats all of
the heavier-weight proxy-LLM methods tested. The classifier was trained on a benchmark-agnostic
and handcrafted objective, which is to classify data as Common Crawl3 (low quality) or OH2.5
(Teknium, 2023) and Reddit ELI5 (Fan et al., 2019) (high quality). It is combined with an English
filter in Li et al.; we present results for this fastText filter with and without the English filter.

Model and hyperparameters. We use the Pythia 160M LLM configuration from Biderman et al.
(2023) and optimize the hyperparameters, including learning rate, weight decay, and warmup, to
minimize loss on the uniform sampling (no selection algorithm) baseline. Training hyperparameters
were fixed across all methods. We provide additional training and evaluation details in Appendix G.

Results. We report average rankings over initial benchmarks in Table 1, and we find that our ap-
proach significantly outperforms the basic baselines of random sampling, language filtering, and
DSIR. Compared to the existing state of the art from Li et al. (2024), our approach beats the perfor-
mance of the default, English-filtered fastText classifier, but loses slightly once we add in a manual
language filtering step to enable better performance on the multilingual LAMBADA datasets. For
the maintext comparisons, we use the optional fastText classifier from our algorithm to select pre-
training data at the page levels, but we show ablations without the classifier in Appendix H.

Figure 2 shows how each data selection method affects benchmark performance in more detail. Each
block of rows represents a data selection method, while an individual row represents an LLM within
a method that targets a particular benchmark or set of benchmarks. Columns represent benchmarks.
We see that language filtering and perplexity correlations both clearly optimize for the target bench-
mark: within each block, the benchmark column matching each row typically performs best. The
pattern is much less obvious for DSIR – the heatmap looks more uniform across LLMs with different
task targets. We also see that while language filtering has significant impacts on model performance,
our performance significantly exceeds the impact of language filtering across all tested benchmarks.
For some more analysis, including the types of domains selected, see Appendix O and J.

Finally, we note that our results are somewhat insensitive to the specifics of the perplexity-correlation
procedure we present in Algorithm 1. We show in Appendix H that varying the projection method
(linear, L2) and even using Spearman rank correlations (Spearman, 1904) often work better than the

3https://commoncrawl.org

8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Figure 2: Pretraining results with different data selection methods. Each row is an LLM, and each
column is a task. The number in the upper left indicates the ranking of the method when targeting
that benchmark compared to other methods (lower is better). Numbers within the heatmap denote
accuracy for all benchmarks except the LAMBADA tasks for which the values are log perplexities
(where lower scores are better). We find that our approach appropriately optimizes data mixes for
the target language and benchmark, and matches the fastText baseline across most benchmarks.

baselines. This suggests that the performance of our approach is not dependent on the precise form
of the estimator, but holds broadly across perplexity-correlation relationships; we may also be able
to prove the Appendix B and C results for many other rank correlation coefficients. Additionally,
our approach performs better with the optional fastText classifier that our algorithm trains, possibly
because it operates at the page-level instead of the domain-level.

5.2 PREREGISTERED PRETRAINING EXPERIMENTS

For our preregistered experiments, we target aggregates of many different benchmarks: “DCLM
Core”, which is an aggregate of 22 benchmarks, and “Non-EN LAMBADA”, which is an aggregate
of 4. We pretrain on DCLM (Li et al., 2024) data pools at chinchilla optimal (Hoffmann et al.,
2022) levels going up to 1.4B parameters, and we generally see increasing perplexity correlations
performance with scale. See Figure 3 and Appendix N.

5.3 PERFORMANCE RANK PREDICTIONS

Comparing model performance rankings predicted by our regression to the ground truth, we find
generally accurate predictions. Figure 4 shows 5-fold leave-out plots for PIQA, and LAMBADAFR
with rank predictions given by ⟨ ˆθproj, Φ(x)⟩. Every point in the plot is a held-out point: we estimated
θ∗ five times, holding out a different 20% of the data each time, and plotted the held-out predictions.
We find that our estimator achieves high ordinal prediction performance across all target tasks. We
include 5-fold leave-out R2 scores for all tasks in Appendix I.

9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Raw Pool

Raw Pool

Pre-filtered Pool

f
r
e
P
A
D
A
B
M
A
L
N
E
-
n
o
N

.35

.30

.25

.20

.15

.10

.16 .41

1

1.4

f
r
e
P
e
r
o
C
M
L
C
D

.25

.2

.15

.1

.05

.0

Perp. Corr. (Page)

Perp. Corr. (Domain)

Handcrafted fastText
None

.16 .41

1

1.4

.16 .41

1

1.4

Parameter Count (B)

Parameter Count (B)

Figure 3: Preregistered experiment results. We did not see a benefit from using perplexity corre-
lations when the dataset is already extensively filtered, but saw large consistent benefits otherwise,
with the benefits increasing with scale. For the pre-filtered pool, the largest correlation coefficient
was .33 and the smallest was .23 with the vast majority of domains being over .29, so we could
have predicted no or small gains before pretraining. In the raw pool for DCLM Core, the largest
coefficient was .32 and the smallest was −.07. Pre-filtered pool results for Non-EN LAMBADA are
not shown because there is only English in the pre-filtered pool. See Appendix N for more details.

Figure 4: Rank predictions given by ⟨ ˆθproj, Φ(x)⟩ for PIQA and LAMBADA FR. A standard devia-
tion (σ) from the ideal fit is shown in red. 2σ is shown in orange. Many models outside 2σ (shown
in blue) are trained on atypical data such as multilingual data, code, or GPT-4 (Brown et al., 2020)
outputs. Models with atypical architectures (i.e. Mamba; Gu & Dao 2024) are shown in black. Gen-
erally, our estimate tightly predicts ordinal benchmark performance from web corpus losses.

Finally, we discuss outliers in our prediction of model performance. Our predictions are accurate for
LLMs with unusual architectures (e.g. Mamba; Gu & Dao 2024), and the smallest/largest vocabulary
sizes, context sizes, and parameter sizes. However, LLMs that were trained on unusual data are not
as well predicted by our approach (e.g. Phi; Gunasekar et al. 2023). We may require a bigger or more
diverse pretraining data pool or set of models to find estimates that work well for these models.

6 CONCLUSION

Does high-performance data selection require hand-crafted heuristics or prohibitively expensive
model training runs? Our work demonstrates an alternative, viable approach: leveraging existing,
public models as a source of information for data selection. Pretraining experiments suggest that
a simple, correlation-based approach to selecting data can be effective, but more broadly, we show
how to 1) use single-index models as surrogates for downstream performance and 2) build models
that relate losses to downstream performance and use the surrogates effectively to select data.

10

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Jack Spilecki for conversations on the mathematical aspects of the work. We also thank
Zitong Yang, Yangjun Ruan, and Lisa Li for their helpful feedback throughout the project, Ludwig
Schmidt and Samir Gadre for discussions on scaling laws involving benchmark perplexity, Rohan
Pandey for conversations about scaling laws, Sung Min Park for discussions on drafts of this work,
and William Held for conversations about data selection. This work is supported in part by a grant
from Sandia National Laboratories, and gifts from Open Philanthropy, Meta, Panasonic Research,
and the Tianqiao and Chrissy Chen Institute. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recom-
mendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of Sandia National Laboratories. Tristan Thrush is supported in part by the Stanford Graduate
Fellowship.