---
paper_id: 2303.14186
source: arxiv
title: TRAK: Attributing Model Behavior at Scale
converted_at: 2026-03-24T16:16:50.014233
note: "Content extracted before References section"
---

3
2
0
2

r
p
A
3

]
L
M

.
t
a
t
s
[

2
v
6
8
1
4
1
.
3
0
3
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

TRAK: Attributing Model Behavior at Scale

Sung Min Park*, Kristian Georgiev*, Andrew Ilyas*, Guillaume Leclerc, Aleksander M ˛adry
MIT
{sp765,krisgrg,ailyas,leclerc,madry}@mit.edu

Abstract

The goal of data attribution is to trace model predictions back to training data. Despite a
long line of work towards this goal, existing approaches to data attribution tend to force users
to choose between computational tractability and efﬁcacy. That is, computationally tractable
methods can struggle with accurately attributing model predictions in non-convex settings (e.g.,
in the context of deep neural networks), while methods that are effective in such regimes require
training thousands of models, which makes them impractical for large models or datasets.

In this work, we introduce TRAK (Tracing with the Randomly-projected After Kernel), a
data attribution method that is both effective and computationally tractable for large-scale,
differentiable models. In particular, by leveraging only a handful of trained models, TRAK can
match the performance of attribution methods that require training thousands of models. We
demonstrate the utility of TRAK across various modalities and scales: image classiﬁers trained on
ImageNet, vision-language models (CLIP), and language models (BERT and mT5). We provide
code for using TRAK (and reproducing our work) at https://github.com/MadryLab/trak.

1 Introduction

Training data is a key driver of model behavior in modern machine learning systems. Indeed,
model errors, biases, and capabilities can all stem from the training data [IST+19; GDG17; GRM+19].
Furthermore, improving the quality of training data generally improves the performance of the
resulting models [HAE16; LIN+22]. The importance of training data to model behavior has
motivated extensive work on data attribution, i.e., the task of tracing model predictions back to the
training examples that informed these predictions. Recent work demonstrates, in particular, the
utility of data attribution methods in applications such as explaining predictions [KL17; IPE+22],
debugging model behavior [KSH22; SPI+22], assigning data valuations [GZ19; JDW+19], detecting
poisoned or mislabeled data [LZL+22; HL22a], and curating data [KKG+19; LDZ+21; JWS+21].

However, a recurring tradeoff in the space of data attribution methods is that of computational
demand versus efﬁcacy. On the one hand, methods such as inﬂuence approximation [KL17; SZV+22]
or gradient agreement scoring [PLS+20] are computationally attractive but can be unreliable in
non-convex settings [BPF21; IPE+22; ABL+22]. On the other hand, sampling-based methods such
as empirical inﬂuence functions [FZ20], Shapley value estimators [GZ19; JDW+19] or datamodels
[IPE+22] are more successful at accurately attributing predictions to training data but require
training thousands (or tens of thousands) of models to be effective. We thus ask:

Are there data attribution methods that are both scalable and effective in large-scale non-convex settings?

*Equal contribution.

1

TRAK
IF [KL17]

Datamodel [IPE+22]
Representation Sim.

Emp. Inﬂuence [FZ20]
GAS [HL22]

IF-Arnoldi [SZV+22]
TracIn [PLS+20]

ResNet-9 on CIFAR-10

BERT-base on QNLI

n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C

)

→

e
t
a
r
u
c
c
a
e
r
o
m

(

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

102

101

100
Computation time (mins) on 1xA100
(← more efﬁcient)

104

103

105

101

102

103

105
Computation time (mins) on 1xA100
(← more efﬁcient)

104

Figure 1: Our data attribution method TRAK achieves state-of-the-art tradeoffs between speed and
efﬁcacy. Here, we benchmark its performance relative to prior methods on CIFAR-10-trained
ResNet-9 models and QNLI-trained BERT-BASE models. The x-axis indicates the time (in minutes)
it takes to run each method on a single A100 GPU (see Appendix A.4 for details). The y-axis indicates
the method’s efﬁcacy as measured by its ability to make accurate counterfactual predictions (see
Deﬁnition 2.3 for the precise metric); error bars indicate 95% bootstrap conﬁdence intervals.

To properly answer this question, we ﬁrst need a unifying metric for evaluating data attribution
methods. To this end, we adopt the view that a data attribution method is useful insofar as it can
make accurate counterfactual predictions, i.e., answer questions of the form “what would happen
if I trained the model on a given subset S(cid:48) of my training set?” This perspective motivates a
benchmark—inspired by the datamodeling framework [IPE+22]—that measures the correlation
between true model outputs and attribution-derived predictions for those outputs.

With this benchmark in hand, in Section 3 we consider our motivating question and introduce
TRAK (Tracing with the Randomly-projected After Kernel), a new data attribution method for
parametric, differentiable models. The key idea behind TRAK is to ﬁrst approximate models with a
kernel machine (e.g., through the empirical neural tangent kernel [JGH18]) and then to leverage
our understanding of the resulting kernel domain to derive data attribution scores.

We demonstrate that TRAK retains the efﬁcacy of sampling-based attribution methods while
being several orders of magnitude cheaper computationally. For example (Figure 1), on CIFAR-
10 (image classiﬁcation) and QNLI (natural language inference), TRAK can be as effective as
datamodels [IPE+22] while being 100-1000x faster to compute. Furthermore, TRAK is as fast as
existing gradient-based methods such as TracIn [PLS+20] or variations of inﬂuence functions [KL17;
SZV+22], while being signiﬁcantly more predictive of model behavior.

As a result, TRAK enables us to study the connection between model predictions and training
data in large-scale settings. For example, we use TRAK to study predictions of ImageNet classiﬁers
(Section 4); to understand the shared image-text embedding space of CLIP models [RKH+21]
trained on MS COCO [LMB+14] (Section 5.1); and to fact-trace language models (a 300M-parameter
mT5-small model [RSR+20; XCR+21]) ﬁnetuned on FTRACE-TREX (Section 5.2).

2

2 Motivation and Setup

We begin with a focus on the supervised learning regime. We will denote by S = {z1, . . . , zn} an
ordered training set of examples, where each zi = (xi, yi) ∈ Z is an input-label pair. We represent
machine learning models (implicitly) using a model output function f (z; θ), which maps an example
of interest z and model parameters θ to a real number. There are a variety of model output functions
that one can employ—for example, the loss L(z; θ) of the model on the example z is a natural choice.
Ultimately, though, the appropriate model output function to use will depend on the setting that
we are studying.

Throughout this work, we also assume that models are trained to minimize the empirical

training loss, i.e., that the parameters of these models are given by

θ(cid:63)(S) := arg min

θ

∑
zi∈S

L(zi; θ),

(1)

where, again, L(zi; θ) is the model training loss on example zi. We write θ(cid:63) as a function of S as we
will later consider varying S—but when S is clear from the context, we omit it and just write θ(cid:63).

In this paper, our overarching goal is to trace model predictions back to the composition
of training data. This goal—which we refer to as data attribution—is not new. Prior work has
approached it using methods such as inﬂuence functions and their many variants [HRR+11; KL17;
FZ20; HL22a]; sampling-based estimators such as Shapley values [LL17], empirical inﬂuences
[FZ20], and datamodels [IPE+22]; as well as various other approaches [YKY+18; PLS+20; HL22b].
Each of these methods implements a similar interface: given a model and an output of interest
(e.g., loss for a given prediction), a data attribution method computes a score for each training input
indicating its importance to the output of interest. Deﬁnition 2.1 below makes this interface precise:

Deﬁnition 2.1 (Data attribution). Consider an ordered training set of examples S = {z1, . . . , zn} and
a model output function f (z; θ). A data attribution method τ(z, S) is a function τ : Z × Z n → Rn
that, for any example z ∈ Z and a training set S, assigns a (real-valued) score to each training input
zi ∈ S indicating its importance1 to the model output f (z; θ(cid:63)(S)). When the second argument S is
clear from the context, we will omit the second argument and simply write τ(z).

Example 2.2 (Inﬂuence functions as an attribution method). An example of a data attribution method
is the inﬂuence function approach, a concept from robust statistics. For a speciﬁc model output
function f (z; θ) on an example of interest z, an inﬂuence function assigns a score to each training
example zi that approximates the effect on the output f (z; θ) of inﬁnitesimally up-weighting that
training example. A classic result from [CW82] shows that this score can be computed as

τIF(z)i = ∇θ f (z; θ(cid:63))(cid:62) · H−1
θ(cid:63)

· ∇θ L(zi; θ(cid:63)),

where, again, θ(cid:63) are the parameters that minimize the empirical risk, L(zi; θ(cid:63)) is the training loss of
example zi, and Hθ(cid:63) is the Hessian ∇2
θ

∑zi∈S L(zi; θ(cid:63)) of the total training loss.

1
n

Evaluating attribution methods. Given the variety of existing data attribution methods, we need
a method to evaluate them in a consistent way. One popular approach is to simply manually
inspect the training examples that the method identiﬁes as most important for a given prediction or
set of predictions. Such manual inspection can be a useful sanity check, but is also often subjective
and unreliable. For example, in computer vision, visual similarity between two images does not
fully capture the inﬂuence of one on the other in terms of model behavior [IPE+22].

1We make the notion of “importance” more precise later (in Deﬁnition 2.3).

3

A more objective alternative is to treat the scores from a data attribution method as estimates
of some ground-truth parameters—such as leave-one-out inﬂuences [KL17; BPF21; KAT+19] or
Shapley values [LL17]—and then measure the accuracy of these estimates. This approach to
evaluation is not only more quantitative than visual inspection but also inherits all favorable
properties of the ground-truth parameter being considered (e.g., additivity of Shapley values
[Sha51]). However, getting access to these ground-truth parameters can be prohibitively expensive
in large-scale settings.

Finally, yet another possibility is to measure the utility of data attribution scores for an auxiliary
task such as identifying mislabeled data [KL17; HL22a] or active learning [JWS+21]. This approach
can indeed be a useful proxy for evaluating data attribution methods, but the resulting metrics may
be too sensitive to the particulars of the auxiliary task and thus make comparisons across different
problems and settings difﬁcult.

2.1 The linear datamodeling score (LDS)

Motivated by the above shortcomings of existing methodologies, we propose a new metric for
evaluating data attribution methods. At the heart of our metric is the perspective that an effective
data attribution method should be able to make accurate counterfactual predictions about model
outputs. In other words, if a method can accurately quantify the importance of individual training
examples to model outputs, it should also be able to predict how model outputs change when the
training set is modiﬁed in a particular way.

Inspired by Ilyas et al. [IPE+22], we cast this counterfactual estimation task as that of predicting
the model output function f (z; θ(cid:63)(S(cid:48))) given different subsets of the training set S(cid:48). More precisely,
consider—for a ﬁxed example of interest z ∈ Z—the model output f (z; θ(cid:63)(S(cid:48))) arising from training
on a subset S(cid:48) ⊂ S of the training set S (see (1)).2 Since z is ﬁxed and the learning algorithm θ(cid:63)(·) is
ﬁxed, we can view this model output as a function of S(cid:48) alone. A good data attribution method
should help us predict the former from the latter.

To operationalize this idea, we ﬁrst need a way of converting a given data attribution method
τ(·) into a counterfactual predictor. We observe that the vast majority of data attribution methods
are additive—that is, they deﬁne the importance of a group of training examples to be the sum of the
importances of the examples in the group.3 Motivated by this observation, we deﬁne an attribution
method’s prediction of the model output for a subset S(cid:48) ⊂ S as the sum of the corresponding scores:

Deﬁnition 2.3 (Attribution-based output predictions). Consider a training set S, a model output
function f (z; θ), and a corresponding data attribution method τ (see Deﬁnition 2.1). The attribution-
based output prediction of the model output f (z; θ(cid:63)(S(cid:48))) is deﬁned as

gτ(z, S(cid:48); S) := ∑
i : zi∈S(cid:48)

τ(z, S)i = τ(z, S) · 1S(cid:48),

(2)

where 1S(cid:48) is the indicator vector of the subset S(cid:48) of S (i.e., (1S(cid:48) )i = 1{zi ∈ S(cid:48)}).

Intuitively, Deﬁnition 2.3 turns any data attribution method into a counterfactual predictor.
Speciﬁcally, for a given counterfactual training set S(cid:48) ⊂ S, the attribution method’s prediction is
simply the sum of the scores of the examples contained in S(cid:48).

2In many settings, the non-determinism of training makes this model output function a random variable, but we treat

it as deterministic to simplify our notation. We handle non-determinism explicitly in Section 3.2.

3Note that this additivity assumption can be explicit or implicit. Shapley values [Sha51] and datamodels [IPE+22], for
example, take additivity as an axiom. Meanwhile, attribution methods based on inﬂuence functions [HRR+11; KL17;
KAT+19] implicitly use a ﬁrst-order Taylor approximation of the loss function with respect to the vector of training
example loss weights, which is precisely equivalent to an additivity assumption.

4

Now that we have deﬁned how to derive predictions from an attribution method, we can

evaluate these predictions using the linear datamodeling score, deﬁned as follows:

Deﬁnition 2.4 (Linear datamodeling score). Consider a training set S, a model output function f (z; θ),
and a corresponding data attribution method τ (see Deﬁnition 2.1). Let {S1, . . . , Sm : Si ⊂ S} be m
randomly sampled subsets of the training set S, each of size α · n for some α ∈ (0, 1). The linear
datamodeling score (LDS) of a data attribution τ for a speciﬁc example z ∈ Z is given by

LDS(τ, z) := ρ({ f (z; θ(cid:63)(Sj)) : j ∈ [m]}, {gτ(z, Sj; S) : j ∈ [m]}),

where ρ denotes Spearman rank correlation [Spe04]. The attribution method’s LDS for an entire
test set is then simply the average per-example score.

Note that the linear datamodeling score deﬁned above is quantitative, simple to compute,4 and not
tied to a speciﬁc task or modality.

2.2 An oracle for data attribution

Deﬁnition 2.4 immediately suggests an “optimal” approach to data attribution (at least, in terms of
optimizing LDS). This approach simply samples random subsets {S1, . . . Sm} of the training set;
trains a model on each subset (yielding {θ(cid:63)(S1), . . . , θ(cid:63)(Sm)}); evaluates each corresponding model
output function f (z; θ(cid:63)(Sj)); and then ﬁts scores τ(z) that predict f (z; θ(cid:63)(Si)) from the indicator
vector 1Si using (regularized) empirical risk minimization. Indeed, Ilyas et al. [IPE+22] take exactly
this approach—the resulting datamodel-based attribution for an example z is then given by

τDM(z) := min
β∈Rn

(cid:16)

1
m

m
∑
i=1

β(cid:62)1Si − f (z; θ(cid:63)(Si))

(cid:17)2

+ λ(cid:107)β(cid:107)1.

(3)

The attributions τDM(z) turn out to indeed perform well according to Deﬁnition 2.4—that is,
they yield counterfactual predictions that are highly correlated with true model outputs (see
Figure 1). Unfortunately, however, estimating accurate linear predictors (3) may require tens (or
even hundreds) of thousands of samples (Sj, f (z; θ(cid:63)(Sj))). Since each one of these samples involves
training a model from scratch, this direct estimator can be expensive to compute in large-scale
settings. More generally, this limitation applies to all sampling-based attribution methods, such as
empirical inﬂuences [FZ20; CIJ+22] and Shapley values [GZ19; JDW+19].

In light of the above, we can view the approach of Ilyas et al. [IPE+22] as an “oracle” of sorts—it
makes accurate counterfactual predictions (and as a result has found downstream utility [IPE+22;
SPI+22; CJ22]), but is (often prohibitively) costly to compute.

2.3 Data attribution methods beyond sampling

How might we be able to circumvent the estimation cost of sampling-based attributions? Let us
start by examining the existing data attribution methods—speciﬁcally, the ones that use only one
(or a few) trained models—and evaluate them on our LDS benchmark.

4In practice, we can estimate the LDS with 100-500 models, as the average rank correlation (over a sufﬁcient number

of test examples) converges fairly quickly with sample size.

5

Simulating re-training with inﬂuence functions. The bottleneck of the “oracle” datamodels
attribution method (3) [IPE+22] is that obtaining each sample (Sj, f (z; Sj)) requires re-training our
model of interest from scratch on each subset Sj. An alternative approach could be to simulate the
effect of this re-training by making some structural assumptions about the model being studied—
e.g., that its loss is locally well-approximated by a quadratic. This idea has inspired a long line of
work around inﬂuence function estimation [KL17; PLS+20; SZV+22]. The resulting inﬂuence function
attributions (Example 2.2) accurately approximate linear models and other simple models, but can
perform poorly in non-convex settings (e.g., in the context of deep neural networks) [BPF21; IPE+22;
BNL+22]. Indeed, as we can see in Figure 1 (and as we later study in Section 4), estimators based
on inﬂuence functions [KL17; SZV+22; HL22a] signiﬁcantly underperform on our LDS benchmark
(Deﬁnition 2.4) when evaluated on neural networks on standard vision and natural language tasks.

Heuristic measures of example importance. There are also approaches that use more heuristic
measures of training example importance for data attribution. These include methods based on,
e.g., representation space similarity [ZIE+18; HYH+21] or gradient agreement [HL22a]. While such
methods often yield qualitatively compelling results, our experiments (again, see Figure 1) indicate
that, similarly to inﬂuence-based estimators, they are unable to make meaningful counterfactual
predictions about model outputs in the large-scale, non-convex settings we evaluate them on.

3 TRAK: Tracing with the Randomly-Projected After Kernel

We now present TRAK, a new data attribution method which is designed to be both effective and
scalable in large-scale differentiable settings. (Recall from Deﬁnition 2.1 that a data attribution
function is a function mapping examples z to a vector of per-training example scores in Rn.)

As a warm-up, and to illustrate the core primitive behind TRAK, we ﬁrst study the simple case
of logistic regression (Section 3.1). In this setting, data attribution is well-understood—in particular,
there is a canonical attribution method [Pre81] that is both easy-to-compute and highly effective
[WCZ+16; KAT+19]. In Section 3.2, using this canonical attribution method as a primitive, we
derive our data attribution method τTRAK(·) (Equation (17), also summarized in Algorithm 1 in
Section 3.4) which operates by reducing complex models back to the logistic regression case.5

3.1 Warmup: Data attribution for logistic regression

Consider the case where the model being studied is (a generalized form of) binary logistic regression.
In particular, adapting our notation from Section 2, we consider a training set of n examples

S = {z1, . . . , zn : zi = (xi ∈ Rd, bi ∈ R, yi ∈ {−1, 1})},
where each example comprises an input xi ∈ Rd, a bias bi ∈ R, and a label yi ∈ {−1, 1}. The ﬁnal
model parameters θ(cid:63)(S) then minimize the log-loss over the training set, i.e.,
(cid:105)

(cid:104)

θ(cid:63)(S) := arg min

log

1 + exp(−yi · (θ(cid:62)xi + bi))

.

(4)

∑
(xi,yi)∈S

θ

(Note that when the bias terms bi are identically zero, we recover ordinary logistic regression.) The
natural choice of model output function in this case is then the “raw logit” function:

f (z; θ) := θ(cid:62)x + b,

where z = (x, b, y).

(5)

5Note that we focus on logistic regression for simplicity—more generally one can adapt TRAK to any setting where

the training loss is convex in the model output; see Appendix C.1.

6

Data attribution in this simple setting is a well-studied problem. In particular, the one-step Newton
approximation [Pre81; WCZ+16; RM18; KAT+19], which we present as a data attribution method
τNS below, is a standard tool for analyzing and understanding logistic regression models in terms
of their training data. (We present the theoretical basis for this method in Appendix C.1.)

Deﬁnition 3.1 (One-step Newton approximation [Pre81]). For logistic regression, we deﬁne the
Newton step data attribution method τNS as the approximate leave-one-out inﬂuence [Pre81] of
training examples zi = (xi, bi, yi) on the model output function (5). That is,

τNS(z)i :=

x(cid:62)(X(cid:62)RX)−1xi
i (X(cid:62)RX)−1xi · p(cid:63)

1 − x(cid:62)

i (1 − p(cid:63)
i )
where X ∈ Rn×k is the matrix of stacked inputs xi, p(cid:63)
i
correct-class probability at θ(cid:63) and R is a diagonal n × n matrix with Rii = p(cid:63)

:= (1 + exp(−yi · f (zi; θ(cid:63))))−1 is the predicted

i (1 − p(cid:63)
i ).

(1 − p(cid:63)

i ) ≈ f (z; θ(cid:63)(S)) − f (z; θ(cid:63)(S \ zi))

(6)

If our model class of interest was binary logistic regression, we could simply apply Deﬁnition 3.1
to perform data attribution. As we discuss, however, our goal is precisely to scale data attribution
beyond such convex settings. To this end, we next derive our data attribution method TRAK (Tracing
with the Randomly-projected After Kernel) which leverages τNS (Deﬁnition 3.1) as a primitive.

3.2 TRAK for binary (non-linear) classiﬁers

We now present our method (TRAK) for scaling data attribution to non-convex differentiable settings.
More precisely, following Deﬁnition 2.1, we describe how to compute a function τTRAK : Z → Rn
that maps examples of interest z to vectors of per-training example importance scores in Rn. The
key primitive here will be Deﬁnition 3.1 from above—in particular, we will show how to adapt our
problem into one to which we can apply the approximation (6).

For ease of exposition, we will ﬁrst show how to compute τTRAK in the context of binary
classiﬁers trained with the negative log-likelihood loss. We later generalize TRAK to other types of
models (e.g., to multi-class classiﬁers in Section 3.3, to contrastive models in Section 5.1, and to
language models in Section 5.2). In this setting, let the model output function f (z; θ) be the raw
output (i.e., the logit) of a binary classiﬁer with parameters θ.6 The ﬁnal parameters of the model
can thus be written as

θ(cid:63)(S) = arg min

θ

∑
(xi,yi)∈S

log [1 + exp (−yi · f (zi; θ))] .

(7)

Note that unlike in Section 3.1, we do not assume that the model itself is linear—e.g., the model
might be a deep neural network parameterized by weights θ.

We implement TRAK as a sequence of ﬁve steps:

1. Linearizing the model output function (via Taylor approximation), which reduces the model
of interest to a linear function in parameter space. Prior work (around, e.g., the empirical
neural tangent kernel) suggests that this approximation can be relatively accurate, especially
for overparameterized neural networks [JGH18; WHS22; Lon21; MWY+22].

2. Reducing the dimensionality of the linearized model using random projections. Speciﬁcally,
we take advantage of the Johnson-Lindenstrauss lemma [JL84], which guarantees that this
projection preserves the model-relevant information.

6Note that for the special case of binary classiﬁers, the model output function that we deﬁne (i.e., f (z; θ) = f ((x, y); θ))
depends only on the input x, and not on the label y. When we generalize TRAK to more complex losses in Section 3.3, the
model output function will involve both x and y.

7

3. Estimating attribution scores by leveraging the attribution method described in Deﬁnition 3.1.

4. Ensembling results over several models, each trained on a random subset of the original

training set S.

5. Sparsifying the attribution scores using soft-thresholding.

We discuss these steps in more depth below.

(Step 1) Linearizing the model. Recall that our goal here is to apply the data attribution method
τNS from Deﬁnition 3.1. The main roadblock to applying Deﬁnition 3.1 in our setting is that we are
studying a non-linear model—that is, our model output function may not be a linear function of θ.
We address this issue by approximating f (z; θ) with its Taylor expansion centered around the ﬁnal
model parameters θ(cid:63). In particular, for any θ, we replace f (z; θ) with
ˆf (z; θ) := f (z; θ(cid:63)) + ∇θ f (z; θ(cid:63))(cid:62)(θ − θ(cid:63)).
This approximation suggests a change in perspective—rather than viewing f (z; θ) as a non-linear
model acting on inputs x, we can view it as a linear model acting on inputs ∇θ f (z; θ(cid:63)). In particular,
rewriting the loss minimization (7) while replacing f (z; θ) with ˆf (z; θ) yields
(cid:16)

(8)

(cid:16)

(cid:104)

θ(cid:62)∇θ f (zi; θ(cid:63)) + f (zi; θ(cid:63)) − ∇θ f (zi; θ(cid:63))(cid:62)θ(cid:63)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:105)

θ(cid:63)(S) = arg min

1 + exp

−yi ·

log

(9)

.

∑
(xi,yi)∈S

θ

Now, Equation (9) should look familiar—speciﬁcally, if we deﬁne the variables gi := ∇θ f (zi; θ(cid:63))
and bi := f (zi; θ(cid:63)) − ∇θ f (zi; θ(cid:63))(cid:62)θ(cid:63), then (9) becomes
θ(cid:63)(S) = arg min

1 + exp

θ(cid:62)gi + bi

−yi ·

(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:105)

(10)

log

(cid:16)

(cid:16)

(cid:104)

.

∑
(gi,bi,yi)

θ

Comparing (10) to (4) (from Section 3.1) makes it clear that we can view θ(cid:63) as the solution to a
(generalized) logistic regression, in which the inputs xi are gradients gi := ∇θ f (zi; θ(cid:63)) of the model,
the bias terms are bi := f (zi; θ(cid:63)) − ∇θ f (zi; θ(cid:63))(cid:62)θ(cid:63) and the labels yi remain the same.
Note: In the context of neural networks, we can view Step 1 as replacing the binary classiﬁer with
its empirical neural tangent kernel (eNTK) approximation [JGH18; ABP22; WHS22]. We discuss
how TRAK connects to the eNTK in more detail in Section 6.

(Step 2) Reducing dimensionality with random projections. The linear approximation from
Step 1 dramatically simpliﬁes our model class of interest from a highly non-linear classiﬁer to
simple logistic regression. Still, the resulting logistic regression can be extremely high dimensional.
In particular, the input dimension of the linear model (8) is the number of parameters of the original
model (which can be on the order of millions or billions), not the dimensionality of the inputs xi.
To reduce the dimensionality of this problem, we leverage a classic result of Johnson and
Lindenstrauss [JL84]. This result guarantees that multiplying each gradient gi = ∇θ f (zi; θ(cid:63)) ∈ Rp
by a random matrix P ∼ N (0, 1)p×k for k (cid:28) p preserves inner products g(cid:62)
i gj with high probability7
(while signiﬁcantly reducing the dimension). Thus, we deﬁne the “feature map” φ : Z → Rk as
φ(z) := P(cid:62)∇θ f (z; θ(cid:63)),
i.e., a function taking an example z to its corresponding projected gradient, and from now on
replace gi with

φi := φ(zi) = P(cid:62)gi = P(cid:62)∇θ f (zi; θ(cid:63)).
(12)
7In Appendix C.2 we discuss why preserving inner products sufﬁces to preserve the structure of the logistic regression.

(11)

8

(Step 3) Estimating inﬂuences. Now that we have simpliﬁed our original model of interest to a
logistic regression problem of tractable dimension, we can ﬁnally adapt Deﬁnition 3.1.

To this end, recall that the training “inputs” are now the (projected) gradients φi (see (12)). We
thus replace the matrix X in (6) with the matrix Φ := [φ1; . . . , φn] ∈ Rn×k of stacked projected
gradients. We also ﬁnd empirically that both the denominator in (6) and the diagonal matrix R
have little effect on the resulting estimates, and so we omit them from our adapted estimator. Our
estimator for attribution scores for an example of interest z thus becomes:

where we recall from (11) that φ(z) = P(cid:62)∇θ f (z; θ(cid:63)), and where we deﬁne

τ(z, S) := φ(z)(cid:62)(Φ(cid:62)Φ)−1Φ(cid:62)Q,

(1 + exp(yi · f (zi; θ(cid:63))))−1(cid:111)(cid:17)
to be the n × n diagonal matrix of “one minus correct-class probability” terms.8

Q := diag({1 − p(cid:63)

i }) = diag

(cid:16)(cid:110)

(13)

(14)

Remark. An alternative way to motivate our single-model estimator (Equation (13)) is to compute
the inﬂuence function [KL17] using the generalized Gauss-Newton approximation to the Hessian
[SEG+17; Mar20; BNL+22]. As noted in prior works [TBG+21; BNL+22], this approximation is a
more convenient choice than the full Hessian as it is guaranteed to be positive semi-deﬁnite.

(Step 4) Ensembling over independently trained models. So far, our analysis ignores the fact
that in many modern settings, training is non-deterministic. That is, applying the same learning
algorithm to the same training dataset (i.e., changing only the random seed) can yield models with
(often signiﬁcantly) differing behavior [NRK21; DHM+20]. Non-determinism poses a problem for
data attribution because by deﬁnition, we cannot explain such seed-based differences in terms of
the training data.

To “smooth out” the impact of such seed-based differences, we aggregate the estimator (13)
across multiple trained models (for computational efﬁciency, one can also use different checkpoints
from the same model—see Appendix E.3). In particular, we adopt the natural idea of just averaging
τ(z, S) from (13) directly, with two small modiﬁcations:

(a) Rather than computing M copies of (13) and averaging the results, we separately compute
and average M copies of Q (i.e., (14)) and M copies of φ(z)(cid:62)(Φ(cid:62)Φ)−1Φ(cid:62) (i.e., the remaining
terms in (13)). We then take the product of these averaged matrices.

(b) Rather than training M copies of the same model θ(cid:63)(S), we sample M random subsets of S
(S1, . . . , SM), and use the resulting models θ(cid:63)(S1), . . . , θ(cid:63)(SM) to compute attribution scores.
The ﬁrst modiﬁcation (a) is mainly for numerical stability, while the second modiﬁcation (b)
is meant to better handle duplicated training examples (and, more generally, features that are
highly “redundant” in the training data). We study the effect of these modiﬁcations empirically in
Appendix E. At this point, our estimator is of the form:

(cid:32)

(cid:33)

(cid:32)

(cid:33)

τM(z, S) :=

1
M
where S1, . . . , SM are M randomly selected subsets of the training set S; Φm are the corresponding
projected gradients from the model θ(cid:63)(Sm); φm(z) is the featurized example z under model θ(cid:63)(Sm);
and Qm is the corresponding matrix of probabilities as deﬁned in Equation (14).

φm(z)(cid:62)(Φ(cid:62)
m

Φm)−1Φ(cid:62)
m

1
M

(15)

Qm

·

,

M
∑
i=1

M
∑
i=1

8Note that in our linearization (10), the predicted probability is also a function of the bias terms bi. We can avoid
having to compute these bias terms by simply using the predicted probability from the true model (i.e., the neural
network) instead of the linearized one.

9

In the last step, we post-process the attribution
(Step 5) Inducing sparsity via soft-thresholding.
scores from Step 4 via soft thresholding, a common denoising method in statistics [Don95] for when
an underlying signal is known to be sparse. Within our particular context, Ilyas et al. [IPE+22] ﬁnd
that for neural networks attribution scores are often sparse—that is, each test example depends
on only a few examples from the training set. Motivated by this observation, we apply the soft
thresholding operator S(·; λ) deﬁned for any τ ∈ Rn as:

S(τ; λ) = (τi − λ) · 1{τi > λ} + (τi + λ) · 1{τi < −λ}.

(16)

We choose the soft threshold parameter λ via cross-validation. That is, given a set of trained models,
we ﬁrst estimate attribution scores (15), then sample a range of values for λ, compute corresponding
attribution scores by applying (16), and ﬁnally select the value of λ that yields that highest linear
datamodeling score (Deﬁnition 2.4) on the set of trained models. After applying soft-thresholding,
our ﬁnal estimator becomes

τTRAK(z, S) := S

(cid:32)(cid:32)

(cid:33)

(cid:32)

Qm

·

1
M

M
∑
i=1

1
M

M
∑
i=1

φm(z)(cid:62)(Φ(cid:62)
m

Φm)−1Φ(cid:62)
m

, (cid:98)λ

(17)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

where, again, (cid:98)λ is selected via cross-validation (see Appendix A.2 for details).

3.3 Extending to multi-class classiﬁcation

In the previous section, we instantiated TRAK for binary classiﬁers; we now show how to extend
TRAK to the multi-class setting. Recall that our key insight in the binary case was to linearize
the model output function f (z; θ) around the optimal parameters θ(cid:63)(S) (see (8)). Our choice of
output function (i.e., the raw logit of the classiﬁer) allowed us to then cast the original (non-convex)
learning problem of interest as an instance of binary logistic regression with inputs ∇θ f (z; θ(cid:63)). That
is, we made the approximation

θ(cid:63)(S) ≈ arg min

θ

∑
zi∈S

(cid:104)

log

1 + exp

(cid:16)

−yi ·

(cid:16)

∇θ f (zi; θ(cid:63))(cid:62)θ + bi

(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:105)

,

(18)

and then leveraged Deﬁnition 3.1.

To apply this same approach to the c-class setting (for c > 2), one possibility is to ﬁrst transform
the problem into c2 binary classiﬁcation problems, then apply the approach from Section 3.2 directly.
(For example, Malladi et al. [MWY+22] use this transformation to apply the neural tangent kernel
to c-way classiﬁcation problems.) In large-scale settings, however, it is often expensive or infeasible
to study of all c2 subproblems, e.g., ImageNet has c = 1000 classes.

We thus take a different approach. In short, we leverage the fact that we always have labels
available (even for test examples) to reduce the multi-class classiﬁcation problem to a single logistic
regression. More speciﬁcally, for an example z = (x, y), we deﬁne the model output function

f (z; θ) := log

(cid:18) p(z; θ)

1 − p(z; θ)

(cid:19)

,

(19)

where p(z; θ) is the softmax probability assigned to the correct class.

A crucial property of the model output function (19) is that it allows us to rewrite the loss

function for c-way classiﬁcation as

L(z; θ) = − log(p(z; θ))

= log [1 + exp (− f (z; θ))] ,

(20)

(21)

10

where the ﬁrst line is the deﬁnition of cross-entropy loss, and the second line comes from (19). As a
result, if we linearize f (z; θ) as in Step 1 above (Section 3.2), we can make the approximation

θ(cid:63)(S) ≈ arg min

θ

∑
zi∈S

(cid:104)

log

1 + exp

(cid:16)

−∇θ f (zi; θ(cid:63))(cid:62)θ + bi

(cid:17)(cid:105)

.

This approximation is identical to the one we made for the binary case (see (18)). We can thus treat
the multi-class problem as a single binary logistic regression with inputs ∇θ f (zi; θ(cid:63))9 and then
apply Steps 2-5 from Section 3.2 directly to this binary problem.

3.4

Implementing TRAK

We summarize our ﬁnal algorithm for computing the data attribution method τTRAK in the general
multi-class case (see also Equation (17)) in Algorithm 1. The output of the algorithm is an attribution
matrix T, whose rows are given by τTRAK(z, S). To make Algorithm 1 efﬁcient even for very large
models, we implemented a highly optimized random projector, which we discuss in Appendix B.

Algorithm 1 TRAK for multi-class classiﬁers (as implemented)

1: Input: Learning algorithm A, dataset S of size n, sampling fraction α ∈ (0, 1], correct-class

likelihood function p(z; θ), projection dimension k ∈ N

6:

7:

8:

9:

10:

11:

12:

2: Output: Matrix of attribution scores T ∈ Rn×n
f (z; θ) := log( p(z;θ)
1−p(z;θ) )
3:
4: for m ∈ {1, . . . , M} do
5:

Sample random S(cid:48) ⊂ S of size α · n
θ(cid:63)
m ← A(S(cid:48))
P ∼ N (0, 1)p×k
Q(m) ← 0n×n
for i ∈ {1, . . . , n} do

φi ← P(cid:62)∇θ f (zi; θ(cid:63)
m)
(m)
ii ← 1 − p(zi; θ(cid:63))
Q
end for
Φm ← [φ1; · · · ; φn](cid:62)

13:
14: end for
(cid:20)
1
15: T ←
m

M
∑
m=1

Φm(Φ(cid:62)
m

Φm)−1Φ(cid:62)
m

(cid:21) (cid:20)

(cid:21)

Q(m)

1
m

M
∑
m=1

16: return SOFT-THRESHOLD(T)

(cid:46) Margin function fθ

(cid:46) Train a model on S(cid:48)
(cid:46) Sample projection matrix

(cid:46) Compute gradient at θ(cid:63)

m and project to k dimensions
(cid:46) Compute weighting term

4 Evaluating TRAK

We now evaluate TRAK (see Equation (17) and Algorithm 1 in Section 3.4) in a variety of vision and
natural language settings. To this end, we compare TRAK with existing data attribution methods and
show that it achieves signiﬁcantly better tradeoffs between efﬁcacy and computational efﬁciency.

9Note that the corresponding “labels” for this logistic regression are actually identically equal to one—to see this,
compare (21) to (18). This does not change the resulting attributions, however, as Deﬁnition 3.1 only depends on labels
through its dependence on the correct-class probability p∗
i .

11

4.1 Experimental setup

We evaluate and study TRAK with the following experimental setup.

Datasets, models, and baselines. We use ResNet-9 classiﬁers trained on the CIFAR dataset
(CIFAR-10, and a two-class subset called CIFAR-2); ResNet-18 [HZR+15] classiﬁers trained on the
1000-class ImageNet [RDS+15] dataset, and pre-trained BERT [DCL+19] models ﬁnetuned on the
QNLI (Question-answering Natural Language Inference) classiﬁcation task from the GLUE bench-
mark [WSM+18]. We provide further details on these choices of dataset and task in Appendix A.1.
To put TRAK’s performance into context, we also evaluate a variety of existing attribution meth-
ods, including inﬂuence functions [KL17]; a variant based on the Arnoldi iteration [SZV+22]; TracIn
[PLS+20]; gradient aggregated similarity (GAS) [HL22b]; representation similarity [HYH+21];
empirical inﬂuences [FZ20]; and datamodels [IPE+22]. (See Appendix A.3 for more details.)

Evaluation with linear datamodeling scores. For each method and each dataset we consider, we
compute its linear datamodeling score (LDS) as described in Deﬁnition 2.4. Speciﬁcally, let τ be a
given data attribution method (as framed in Deﬁnition 2.1), and let gτ(z, S(cid:48); S) be its corresponding
attribution-derived prediction function (see Deﬁnition 2.3). Then, to evaluate τ:

1. We sample 100 different random subsets {Sj ⊂ S : j ∈ [100]} of the training set S, and train
ﬁve models on each one of these subsets. Each subset Sj is sampled to be 50% of the size of S,
but we also consider other subsampling ratios in Appendix D.

2. For each example of interest z (i.e., for each example in the test set of the dataset we are
studying), we approximate the expectation of the model output E[ f (z; θ(cid:63)
i (Sj))] for each
training subset Sj (where the expectation is taken over the learning algorithm’s randomness)
by averaging across the corresponding ﬁve models {θ(cid:63)

i (Sj)}5

i=1.

3. We then compute the linear datamodeling score for each example of interest z as the Spearman
rank correlation [Spe04] between the averaged model outputs computed in the previous step
and the attribution-derived predictions gτ(z, Sj; S) of model outputs. That is, we compute:

Spearman-ρ

(cid:18) (cid:40)

1
5

(cid:124)

5
∑
i=1

f (z; θ(cid:63)

i (Sj)) : j ∈ [100]

(cid:123)(cid:122)
averaged model outputs

(cid:41)

, {gτ(z, Sj; S) : j ∈ [100]}
(cid:124)
(cid:125)
(cid:123)(cid:122)
attributed-derived predictions
of model outputs

(cid:125)

(cid:19)

4. Finally, we average the LDS (Deﬁnition 2.4) across 2,000 examples of interest, sampled
uniformly at random from the validation set, and report this score along with the 95%
bootstrap conﬁdence intervals corresponding to the random re-sampling from the subsets Sj.

Computational cost. We quantify the computational cost of each attribution method using two
metrics. The ﬁrst one is the total wall-time of computing attribution scores on a single A100 GPU.
This metric is intuitive and useful, but depends on implementation details and hardware. We thus
also study a second metric, namely, the total number of trained models used. This metric is hardware
and implementation-agnostic; it is motivated by an observation that for large models, the time
it takes to compute attribution scores will be dominated by the time it takes to train the models
needed for attribution.10 We ﬁnd that for both metrics, our results lead to similar conclusions.

10For many data attribution methods, such as inﬂuence function-based methods or TRAK, there is an extra step of
computing per-example gradients through the model of interest. However, this step is generally fully parallelizable, and
usually bounded by the time it takes to train a model from scratch.

12

4.2 Results

Across all models and datasets that we consider, TRAK attains a signiﬁcantly better tradeoff between
efﬁcacy (as measured by the LDS) and computational efﬁciency than all the other attribution
methods that we examine (see Figures 1 and 2 and Table D.2). Indeed, TRAK attains efﬁcacy
comparable to datamodels (which achieves the best performance among existing methods when
unconstrained) with a computational footprint that is (on average) over 100x smaller.

TRAK
IF [KL17]

Datamodel [IPE+22]
Representation Sim.

Emp. Inﬂuence [FZ20]
GAS [HL22]

IF-Arnoldi [SZV+22]
TracIn [PLS+20]

(a) ResNet-9 on CIFAR-2

(b) ResNet-9 on CIFAR-10

)
S
D
L
(
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C

)

→

e
t
a
r
u
c
c
a

e
r
o
m

(

)
S
D
L
(
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C

)

→

e
t
a
r
u
c
c
a

e
r
o
m

(

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

100

101

102

103

104

105

100

101

102

103

104

105

(c) BERT-base on QNLI

(d) ResNet-18 on ImageNet

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

104

100

100

101

102
Number of models used
(← more efﬁcient)

103

102

103

101
104
Number of models used
(← more efﬁcient)

105

Figure 2: TRAK achieves state-of-the-art tradeoffs between attribution efﬁcacy and efﬁciency. We use TRAK
to attribute ResNet-9 classiﬁers trained on CIFAR-2 and CIFAR-10; ResNet-18 classiﬁers trained
on ImageNet; and BERT-base models ﬁnetuned on QNLI. The x-axis indicates the computational
cost measured as the number of trained models that a given method uses to compute attribution
scores. The y-axis indicates the method’s efﬁcacy as measured by the linear datamodeling score
(LDS). Error bars indicate 95% bootstrap conﬁdence intervals.

13

In Figure 3 we also display, for two randomly chosen test
Inspecting TRAK-identiﬁed examples.
examples from QNLI, CIFAR-10, and ImageNet datasets, the training examples corresponding to
the most positive and negative TRAK scores.

Example

Highest TRAK score (+)

Lowest TRAK score (-)

Q: What genre of music is
Lindisfarne classiﬁed as? A:
Lindisfarne are a folk-rock
group with a strong Tyne-
side connection. (Yes)

Q: What genre of music is featured at Junk?
A: The nightclub, Junk, has been nominated
for the UK’s best small nightclub, and plays
host to a range of dance music’s top acts.
(Yes)

Q: Which genre did Madonna started out in?
A: Stephen Thomas Erlewine noted that with
her self-titled debut album, Madonna began
her career as a disco diva, in an era that did
not have any such divas to speak of. (No)

Q: What can rubisco do by
mistake? A: It can waste up
to half the carbon ﬁxed by
the Calvin cycle. (No)

Q: What can clothing provide during haz-
ardous activities? A: Further, they can pro-
vide a hygienic barrier, keeping infectious
and toxic materials away from the body. (No)

Q: Quantum Dot LEDs can do what special
skill? A: This allows quantum dot LEDs to cre-
ate almost any color on the CIE diagram. (Yes)

Figure 3: We present two randomly selected test examples and their corresponding most helpful
(highest-scoring) and most detracting (lowest-scoring) training examples as identiﬁed by TRAK, for
BERT-BASE classiﬁers trained on QNLI (top); ResNet-9 classiﬁers trained on CIFAR-10 (middle);
and ResNet-18 classiﬁers trained on ImageNet (bottom). We observe that TRAK-identiﬁed training
examples are semantically similar to the corresponding target examples, and that the vast majority
of helpful (detracting) examples are of the same (different) class as the target. We present more
such examples in Appendix D.3 and at trak.csail.mit.edu.

14

More positiveMore negativefrogHeld-out ExamplefrogfrogfrogfroghorsehorsehorsedogtrucktrucktruckshiptruckcarcarcarcarbirdbirdbirdbirddeerplaneplaneplaneplaneMore positiveMore negativeDutchovenHeld-out ExampleDutchovenDutchovenDutchovenDutchovenwokwokwokwokbasketballbasketballbasketballbasketballbasketballvolleyballkneepadkneepadcowboyhatstovestovestovestovestovetrafficlightspaceheaterfirescreendoormatComparing TRAK and datamodel scores. Recall from Section 2.2 that one can view datamodels
[IPE+22] as an “oracle” of sorts for the linear datamodeling score (LDS) objective. It turns out,
as we show in Table 4, that TRAK scores correlate with datamodel scores, while scores of other
attribution methods do not. (We deﬁne correlation here as the Spearman rank correlation between
the vectors τTRAK(z) and τDM(z), averaged over multiple examples of interest z.)

Method

TRAK100

TRAK20 TracIn [PLS+20]

IF [KL17] GAS [HL22a]

random

ρ(τ, τDM)

0.26

0.19

0.00

0.03

0.03

-0.03

Table 4: Correlation with datamodel scores. We measure the correlation between the attribution scores
computed by different methods τ and those given by datamodels τDM [IPE+22] on the CIFAR-10
dataset. Speciﬁcally, for each test example of interest z, we compute the Spearman rank correlation
(ρ) between τ(z)i and τDM(z)i over training examples i that have nonzero datamodel weight
τDM(z)i and then average the resulting correlation over 1000 randomly chosen examples of interest.
TRAKN indicates a version of TRAK that uses N trained models in its estimator.

In Appendix E, we study the roots of TRAK’s
Understanding the roots of TRAK’s performance.
performance through an extensive ablation study. We vary, for example, how we linearize the
model of interest (Step 1 in Section 3.2), the dimension k of the random projection we use (Step 2 in
Section 3.2), how we apply the Newton step attribution from Deﬁnition 3.1 (Step 3 in Section 3.2),
and how we aggregate information from independently trained models (Step 4 in Section 3.2).

As a byproduct of this investigation, we ﬁnd two ways of computing TRAK at even lower cost:
(a) leveraging models that have not been trained to convergence, and (b) taking advantage of
multiple checkpoints from the same model, rather than multiple models from independent training
runs. We ﬁnd (see Tables 5 and 6, explained further and reproduced in Appendix E) that both
of these optimizations can dramatically reduce TRAK’s computational cost without signiﬁcantly
degrading its performance.

# training epochs

LDS

# independent models

LDS

1
5
10
15
25

0.100
0.204
0.265
0.293
0.308

5
6
10
100

0.329
0.340
0.350
0.355

Table 5: The performance of TRAK on CIFAR-
10 as a function of the epoch at which we
terminate model training. In all cases, TRAK
scores are computed with projection dimen-
sion k = 1000 and M = 100 independently
trained models.

Table 6: TRAK maintains its efﬁcacy when we use
multiple checkpoints from different epochs of the
same training run instead of checkpoints from
independently-trained models (CIFAR-10). In
all cases, M = 100 checkpoints and projection
dimension k = 4000 are used to compute TRAK
scores.

15

5 Applications of TRAK

In Section 4, we evaluated our data attribution method TRAK on standard image classiﬁcation and
NLP tasks and compared its performance to existing attribution methods. We now illustrate the
usefulness of TRAK through three additional applications:

In Section 5.1, we use TRAK to study image-text embeddings of models
Attributing CLIP models.
trained with the CLIP contrastive loss [RKH+21]. In particular, we show how leveraging TRAK
allows us to identify small subsets of the training set that, when removed, cause the resulting CLIP
embeddings to fail to capture a given image-caption pair association.

Fact tracing language models. Next, in Section 5.2, we use TRAK to provide data attribution for
language models [VSP+17]. In particular, we apply TRAK to fact tracing: the problem of tracing a
language model’s factual assertion back to the corresponding training examples. On the FTRACE-
TREX fact tracing benchmark, TRAK signiﬁcantly outperforms the best gradient-based baseline
(TracIn) used in prior work. Furthermore, while TRAK performs worse than an information retrieval
baseline (BM25 [RWJ+95]), we demonstrate that this is likely a shortcoming of the benchmark
rather than of TRAK. In particular, removing training examples traced by TRAK (and re-training
the model) reduces that model’s accuracy on the corresponding facts more than removing training
examples traced by BM25—and, in fact, more than removing the ground-truth training examples as
indicated by FTRACE-TREX.

Accelerating datamodel applications. Finally, in Section 5.3, we use TRAK to accelerate two
downstream applications that leverage datamodel scores. That is, ﬁrst, we look at the problem of
estimating prediction brittleness using datamodel scores [IPE+22]. Then, we revisit the MODELDIFF
algorithm [SPI+22], which leverages datamodel scores for learning algorithm comparison, i.e., the task
of distinguishing two learning algorithms based on feature priors they instill. For both applications,
using TRAK scores in place of datamodel scores reduces the total computational cost by at least a
factor of 100 while retaining the same effectiveness.

5.1 Attributing CLIP models

Recent works have found that one can leverage natural language supervision to help models
learn a rich joint image-text embedding space. In particular, CLIP (Contrastive Language-Image
Pre-training) [RKH+21] representations have become a versatile primitive bridging visual and
language domains and is used, for example, for zero-shot classiﬁcation [RKH+21] and as text
encoders for latent diffusion models [RBL+22]. While the quality of these representations—as
measured by aggregate metrics such as downstream zero-shot accuracy—appears to be driven
largely by the properties and scale of the training datasets [FIW+22; SDT+22; CBW+22], we lack a
ﬁne-grained understanding of how the composition of the training data contributes to learning
well-aligned representations. To that end, we use TRAK to investigate how training data inﬂuences
the resulting CLIP embeddings at a local level. That is, we want to be able to pin-point training
examples that cause a model to learn a given speciﬁc image-caption pair association.

5.1.1 Computing TRAK for CLIP

Similarly to the classiﬁcation setting we were considering so far, we need to ﬁrst choose an
appropriate model output function (see, e.g., Equation (19)) to compute attribution scores with

16

TRAK. This choice will be motivated by the CLIP training loss (which we review below) and will
reduce our setting back to the classiﬁcation case.

The CLIP loss. A CLIP model with parameters θ takes in an image-caption pair (x, y) and outputs
an image embedding φ(x; θ) and a text embedding ψ(y; θ). Given a (random) batch of training
examples B = {(x1, y1), ..., (xn, yn)}, the CLIP training loss computes all n × n pairwise cosine
similarities between the image and text embeddings

Sij := φ(xi; θ) · ψ(yj; θ),

and aims to maximize the cosine similarities Sii of correct pairs while minimizing the cosine
similarities Sij, for i (cid:54)= j, of incorrect pairs. More speciﬁcally, the training loss of example (xi, yi) ∈ B
is deﬁned as the following symmetric cross entropy over the similarity scores Sij:

L(xi, yi; θ) = − log

exp(Sii)
∑
1≤j≤n

exp(Sij)

− log

exp(Sii)
∑
1≤j≤n

exp(Sji)

,

(22)

where the ﬁrst term corresponds to matching each image xi to its correct caption yi, and the second
term corresponds to matching each caption to its correct image. In effect, we are solving two
classiﬁcation problems: one where the images are inputs and captions (from the same batch) are
labels, and vice versa.

Reducing to classiﬁcation. Recall that in the classiﬁcation setting we trained the model with the
cross entropy loss (i.e., − log p(z; θ), where p(z; θ) is the correct-class probability), and used the
model output function f (z; θ) = log p(z; θ)/(1 − p(z; θ)) (Equation (19)), i.e., the logit transform of
the correct-class probability to compute TRAK scores.

To take advantage of the same formula in the CLIP setting, note that our loss (22) can be viewed

as having the form

L(xi, yi; θ) = − log p1(xi, yi; θ) − log p2(xi, yi; θ),

where p1(xi, yi; θ) corresponds to the probability of matching an image to its corresponding caption
based on the cosine similarity, and likewise for p2(xi, yi; θ). A natural choice of model output
function in this case, then, is using the sum of the model output functions corresponding to the two
classiﬁcation problems:

f (xi, yi; θ) := log

(cid:18) p1(xi, yi; θ)

(cid:19)

1 − p1(xi, yi; θ)

+ log

(cid:18) p2(xi, yi; θ)

(cid:19)

1 − p2(xi, yi; θ)

= − log ∑
1≤j≤n

exp(Sij − Sii) − log ∑
1≤j≤n

exp(Sji − Sii).

Indeed, this choice allows us once again (see Section 3.3) to reduce our problem to an instance
of logistic regression and apply the same formula for inﬂuence approximation (Deﬁnition 3.1) as
before. We can then also compute TRAK scores following the same approach (i.e., using Algorithm 1
in Section 3.4).

17

Figure 7: Attributing CLIP trained on MS COCO. The ﬁrst column shows two target image-caption
pairs from the validation set of MS COCO. The second two columns display the nearest neighbors
to the target in CLIP embedding space (using the average of image and text cosine similarities).
The next two columns show the train set samples that, according to TRAK, are most helpful for
aligning the image embedding to the caption embedding. Similarly, the last two columns display
the train samples that are the most detracting from aligning the image and caption embeddings. In
Appendix D.3, we display more examples and also compare to TracIn.

5.1.2 Results

We train image-text models (with a ResNet-50 [HZR+15] as the image encoder and a Transformer
[VSP+17] as the text encoder) using the CLIP objective on MS COCO [LMB+14]. To evaluate the
effectiveness of TRAK applied to such CLIP models, we perform a qualitative (visual) analysis; and
a quantitative (counterfactual) evaluation. In both cases, we compare TRAK with TracIn and CLIP
similarity distance11 baselines.

Visual analysis. Figure 7 displays two target examples of interest along with the corresponding
training examples having the highest attribution scores (according to TRAK and CLIP similarity
distance—see Appendix D.3 for the analysis corresponding to TracIn). For the ﬁrst example, the
nearest neighbor in the CLIP space (the polar bear) turns out to have a negative attribution score
according to TRAK. For the second example, the most helpful TRAK examples are the ones for which
the captions contain the phrase “a couple of animals” but where the images do not necessarily
feature giraffes (possibly because the target caption does not mention “giraffe” either). On the
other hand, the most helpful examples according to CLIP similarity distance all feature giraffes.
These differences suggest that TRAK attribution scores may capture signiﬁcantly different traits
from CLIP similarity distance.

Counterfactual evaluation. We next investigate to what extent training examples identiﬁed by
each attribution method affect the CLIP model’s ability to learn a given image-caption association.
Speciﬁcally, we say that a CLIP model has learned a given association between an image and a

11We use the average of cosine similarities between the image embeddings and between the text embeddings.

18

targeta close up of ahairy white catoutsideCLIP nearest neighborsthis dirty sheepmust have rolledin the muda white bear on arock eating acarrotmost positive TRAK scorea brown longhaired dog sittingoutside next to astreetthe white cat islaying down on topof the carmost negative TRAK scorea polar bear eatsa carrot on asnowy fielda yellow banana ontop of a coffeecup in a microwavetargeta couple ofanimals that arewalking around thegrassCLIP nearest neighborstwo giraffesstanding in thegrass on a sunnydaya giraffe standingon a desert fieldnext to rocksmost positive TRAK scorea couple ofanimals that areout in the grassa couple ofanimals that arestanding aroundeach othermost negative TRAK scoretwo skiers in thesnow on a sunnydaya couple of trunksstacked on top ofeach othercaption whenever their corresponding image and caption embeddings have high cosine similarity
relative to other image-caption pairs. To evaluate each attribution method (i.e., TRAK, TracIn, and
CLIP similarity distance), for a given target image-caption pair, we remove from the training set
the k examples with the most positive attribution scores a given attribution method produces, and
then re-train a model from scratch (averaging over ten training runs to reduce stochasticity). Finally,
we examine the decrease in cosine similarity between the embeddings of target image and caption
pair, and average this result over different target pairs.

Our results (Figure 8) indicate that removing training inputs identiﬁed by TRAK can signiﬁcantly
degrade the model’s ability to learn the target image-caption pair. Indeed, removing just k = 400
target-speciﬁc training puts (i.e., less than 0.5% of the train set) decreases the (average) CLIP
similarity distance between the target image and caption embeddings by 0.36. In contrast, removing
the same number of nearest neighbors in CLIP space results in a much smaller effect size (a 0.11
decrease), while removing training examples identiﬁed by TracIn has no signiﬁcant effect.

y
t
i
r
a
l
i

m

i
s

e
n

i
s
o
c
n

i

p
o
r
D

0.4

0.2

0

0.36

CLIP NNs

TracIn [PLS+20]

TRAK (ours)

0.16

0.06

0.03

0.11

0.04

k = 50

k = 400

Number of training examples removed

Figure 8: Which training inputs can we remove from the training set so as the resulting CLIP model no
longer associates a target image with its caption? We measure how the cosine similarity between target
image and caption embeddings is affected when we re-train a CLIP model after removing the most
inﬂuential training examples—as identiﬁed by TRAK, TracIn, and CLIP similarity distance. We
report the decrease in cosine similarity, averaged over 100 randomly selected image-caption pairs
from the validation set. Error bars represent 95% conﬁdence intervals.

5.2 Fact tracing for large language models (mT5)

As large language models are deployed in a variety of contexts, e.g., as conversation agents
[TDH+22] or knowledge bases [PRR+19], there is an emerging need to be able to attribute models’
outputs back to speciﬁc data sources [BTV+22]. To that end, we study fact tracing [ABL+22], i.e., the
task of identifying the training examples that cause a language model to generate a given “fact.”

A benchmark for fact tracing. Akyurek et al. [ABL+22] develop a testbed for the fact tracing
problem by way of a dataset (and corresponding evaluation methodology) called FTRACE-TREX.
We provide a high-level overview of FTRACE-TREX here, and describe it in more depth in Ap-
pendix F.1. The FTRACE-TREX dataset consists of a set of “abstracts” and a set of “queries,” both of
which pertain to the same database of “facts.” Akyurek et al. [ABL+22] annotate each abstract with
a set of facts it expresses, and each query with the (single) fact that it asks about. As a part of the
task setup, one ﬁnetunes a pre-trained language model on the set of abstracts using masked language

19

modeling,12 and then evaluates this model’s correctness on each query in the query set. This step
deﬁnes a set of “novel facts,” i.e., queries that the model answers correctly only after ﬁnetuning.

With the above setup in place, we can deﬁne the FTRACE-TREX fact tracing benchmark.
Akyurek et al. [ABL+22] reason that each novel fact (as identiﬁed above) should have been learned
(during ﬁnetuning) from the abstracts that express the same fact. The benchmark thus evaluates a
given data attribution method’s ability to retrieve, for each novel fact, the abstracts in the training
set that express the same fact. (Such abstracts are called the ground-truth proponents of the query.)
In particular, observe that applying a data attribution method τ(·) to a particular query (treating
the set of abstracts as the training set) yields scores that we can use as a ranking over the set of the
abstracts. Akyurek et al. [ABL+22] compute the mean reciprocal rank (MRR) of the ground-truth
proponents in this ranking (see Appendix F.1), a standard metric from information retrieval, to
quantify the efﬁcacy of τ(·) at fact tracing. We evaluate TRAK on this benchmark, along with two
baselines from [ABL+22], TracIn [PLS+20] and the information retrieval method BM25 [RWJ+95].

Computing TRAK scores for language models. To apply TRAK to this setting, we need to choose
an appropriate model output function, as we did before for the classiﬁcation setting (see Section 3.3)
and for CLIP (see Section 5.1). To this end, we observe that the masked language modeling
objective has a natural interpretation as a sequence of v-way classiﬁcation problems over the
masked tokens, where v is the vocabulary size. Thus, inspired by our analysis of the multi-class
classiﬁcation setting from Section 3.3, we choose the model output function for this setting to be
the sum of the “canonical” model output function (19) for each of the v-way classiﬁcation problems
(see Appendix F.3 for more details).

5.2.1 Results and discussion

We ﬁnd that while TRAK signiﬁcantly outperforms TracIn on the FTRACE-TREX benchmark (0.42
vs. 0.09 using the aforementioned MRR score), neither method matches the performance of the
information retrieval baseline BM25 (0.77 MRR).13

To understand the possible roots of TRAK’s underperformance relative to BM25 on FTRACE-
TREX, we carry out a counterfactual analysis.14 Speciﬁcally, for a subset S(cid:63) of the FTRACE-
TREX query set, we create three corresponding counterfactual training sets. Each such training set
corresponds to removing one of three collections of abstracts from the FTRACE-TREX abstract set:

(a) the most important abstracts for model performance on S(cid:63), as estimated by TRAK;

(b) the abstracts that are most similar to the queries in S(cid:63) according to BM25;

(c) the corresponding “ground-truth proponents” for the queries in S(cid:63) as per FTRACE-TREX.

We then measure the average decrease in performance on S(cid:63) when a model is ﬁnetuned on these
counterfactual datasets compared ﬁnetuning on the full training set. Intuition would suggest that
performance would decrease the most when models are trained on the counterfactual training
set (c); in particular, there is ostensibly no direct evidence for any of the facts corresponding to the
queries in S(cid:63) anywhere in that set.

12In masked language modeling [RSR+20], the language model is asked to predict the tokens corresponding to a

masked-out portion of the input. In FTRACE-TREX, either a subject or object in the abstract is masked out.

13Note that while our ﬁnding that BM25 outperforms TracIn matches that of Akyurek et al. [ABL+22], our exact

numbers are incomparable due to the mismatch in model classes.
14See Appendix F.4 for a detailed account of our experiment.

20

We ﬁnd (see Figure 9), however, that it is only the TRAK-based counterfactual training set that
causes a large change in model behavior. That is, removing abstracts identiﬁed with TRAK leads to
a 34% decrease in accuracy, signiﬁcantly more than the decreases induced by removing abstracts
according to BM25 (10%) or even removing ground-truth proponents (12%).

s
t
e
g
r
a
t
n
o
p
o
r
d
y
c
a
r
u
c
c
A

40

20

0

34

16.5

12

Ground-truth BM25
Method

TRAK

Figure 9: Identifying counterfactually important examples for learning facts on FTRACE-TREX. Given
a set of queries that the language model (mt5-small) originally answers correctly after training,
we compare how three different interventions—removing abstracts with the highest TRAK scores,
removing the most similar abstracts according to BM25, and removing the ground-truth proponents
as indicated by FTRACE-TREX—affect the resulting model’s accuracy on the queries. The y-
axis shows the decrease in accuracy (on the query set, relative to the original model) after each
intervention; results are averaged over 50 queries and eight independent models. Error bars
represent 95% conﬁdence intervals.

Discussion. Our results demonstrate that while TRAK may not be effective at identifying abstracts
that directly express the same fact as a given query (i.e., the ground-truth proponents as deﬁned by
FTRACE-TREX), it can successfully identify the abstracts that are most responsible for the ﬁnetuned
model learning a given fact. In particular, TRAK’s subpar performance on the attribution benchmark
is an artifact of the FTRACE-TREX benchmark rather than a ﬂaw of TRAK itself.

There are several potential explanations for this phenomenon, many of which Akyurek et al.

[ABL+22] already discuss in their work:

• There may be errors in the FTRACE-TREX benchmark. (Although, given the drastic dif-
ference between the TRAK scores and the ground-truth labels in their ability to identify
counterfactually important abstracts, such data errors are unlikely to be the sole culprit.)

• Models may be answering queries by combining facts from the training set. For example,
neither “The largest pyramid is in Giza” nor “Giza is a city in Egypt” would be ground-truth
proponents for the query “Which country is home to the largest pyramid?” in FTRACE-TREX,
but a model that learns both of these facts may still be able to correctly answer that query.

• Alternatively, models may be learning from the syntactic rather than semantic structure of
abstracts. For example, a model may correctly answer that a person from Korea is called a
“Korean” by learning from an abstract which says “A person from Bulgaria is Bulgarian.”

More broadly, our results highlight a difference between fact tracing and behavior tracing. In
other words, ﬁnding a data source that supports a given model-generated text is a different task

21

than identifying the actual data sources that caused the model to generate this text in the ﬁrst place.
While we may be able to address the former problem with model-independent techniques such as
information retrieval or web search, the latter requires methods that remain faithful to (and thus,
dependent on) the model being studied. Our results here indicate that TRAK can be an effective
tool for the latter problem.

5.3 Accelerating datamodel applications

Our evaluation thus far has demonstrated that data attribution scores computed with TRAK can
predict how a given model’s output changes as a function of the composition of the corresponding
model’s training set. While the capability to make such predictions is useful in its own right, prior
work has shown that this primitive also enables many downstream applications [KL17; JDW+19;
AV20]. For example, prior works leverage datamodel scores to identify brittle predictions [IPE+22]
and to compare different learning algorithms [SPI+22]. We now show that using TRAK in place of
datamodel scores can signiﬁcantly speed up these downstream applications too.

5.3.1 Estimating prediction brittleness

Ilyas et al. [IPE+22] use datamodel scores to provide lower bounds on the brittleness of a given
example—that is, given an example of interest z, they identify a subset of the training set whose
removal from the training data causes the resulting re-trained model to misclassify z. The brittleness
estimation algorithm that Ilyas et al. [IPE+22] leverage hinges on the fact that the datamodel
attribution function τDM(z) can accurately predict model outputs, i.e., achieve high LDS. Motivated
by TRAK’s good performance on the linear datamodeling task (see, e.g., Figure 2), we examine
estimating the brittleness of CIFAR-10 examples using TRAK scores in place of datamodel ones
(but otherwise following the procedure of Ilyas et al. [IPE+22]). Our results (see Figure 10) indicate
that TRAK scores computed from an ensemble of just 100 models are about as effective at estimating
brittleness as datamodel scores computed from 50,000 models. Thus, TRAK scores can be a viable
(and orders of magnitude faster) alternative to datamodels for estimating prediction brittleness.

t
e
s

t
s
e
t

0
1
-
R
A
F
I
C

f
o

.
c
a
r
F

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

200

400

600

800

1,000

Datamodels (300k models)
TRAK (100 models)
Datamodels (50k models)
TracIn (100 models)
Representation Sim. (100 models)
Inﬂuence Function (100 models)

# training examples removed to ﬂip prediction

Figure 10: Using TRAK scores to identify brittle model predictions. Following the methodology of Ilyas
et al. [IPE+22], we apply different data attribution methods to estimate the brittleness of model
predictions on examples from the CIFAR-10 validation set. The number of models used by each
attribution method is speciﬁed in parentheses, e.g., TRAK (100) indicates that TRAK scores were
computed using an ensemble of 100 trained models.

22

5.3.2 Learning algorithm comparisons

A useful way to leverage datamodels is to view them as data representations. More speciﬁcally,
following Ilyas et al. [IPE+22], for an example of interest z, one can view the datamodel attribution
τDM(z) as an embedding of z into Rn, where n is the size of the training dataset. Analyzing examples
in such induced datamodel representation spaces turns out to enable uncovering dataset biases and
model-speciﬁc subpopulations [IPE+22]. Furthermore, this representation space is not speciﬁc
to a particular model instance or architecture—it is globally aligned in the sense that for the same
example z, the attribution score τDM(z)i of a given train example i has a consistent interpretation
across different learning pipelines. Shah et al. [SPI+22] leverage the properties of the datamodel
representation space to perform model-agnostic learning algorithm comparison (called MODELDIFF):
given two learning algorithms, they show how to use datamodels to identify distinguishing features,
i.e., features that are used by one learning algorithm but not the other.

Once again, motivated by TRAK’s good performance on the LDS metric, we investigate whether
TRAK scores can substitute for datamodel scores in this context. To this end, we revisit one of
the case studies from Shah et al. [SPI+22]—the one that compares image classiﬁers trained with
and without data augmentation, and identiﬁes features that distinguish these two classes of
models. When applied to this case study, MODELDIFF computed with TRAK scores recovers similar
distinguishing features to the ones originally found by Shah et al. [SPI+22] (using datamodel
scores)—see Figure D.6 for more details. Also, employing TRAK scores in place of datamodel
scores reduces the total computational cost by a factor of 100, showing, once again, that TRAK can
dramatically accelerate downstream tasks that rely on accurate attribution scores.

6 Related work

In this section, we highlight and discuss how TRAK connects to prior works on training data
attribution, the neural tangent kernel, and kernel approximation.

Training data attribution. There is a sizable body of work on data attribution methods. Here we
discuss approaches most similar to ours, but we refer the reader back to Section 2 for an overview
of prior work on data attribution methods and to [HL22b] for an even more extensive survey.

In the setting of generalized linear models, Wojnowicz et al. [WCZ+16] speed up classical inﬂu-
ence estimation (Deﬁnition 3.1) by leveraging random projections. Also, Khanna et al. [KKG+19]
employ a similar estimator based on the Fisher matrix for data attribution and subset selection.
Their experiments are limited though to small neural networks and linear models. Most similarly
to our approach, Achille et al. [AGR+21] leverage the linearized model for approximating inﬂuence
functions (among other applications). However, their approach introduces several changes to the
model of interest (such as modifying activations, loss, and regularization) and focuses on ﬁnetuning
in smaller-scale settings, whereas TRAK can be applied directly to the original model (and at scale).
Similarly to us, prior works also investigate the tradeoffs between scalability and efﬁcacy of
data attribution methods. For instance, Jia et al. [JWS+21] study these tradeoffs by proposing
new metrics and comparing according to them leave-one-out methods (e.g., inﬂuence functions)
and Shapley values. They put forth, in particular, a new estimator for Shapley values that is
based on approximating the original model with a k-nearest neighbors model over the pre-trained
embeddings—this can be viewed as an alternative to working with the linearized model.

As discussed in Section 2, a major line of work uses Hessian-based inﬂuence functions for data
attribution [KL17; KAT+19; BPF21]. In particular, the inﬂuence function effectively computes—up

23

to an error that can be bounded—the one-step Newton approximation with respect to the full
model parameters [KAT+19]. Recall that TRAK also leverages the one-step Newton approximation
in order to estimate leave-one-out inﬂuences for logistic regression (see Section 3). However, in
contrast to the inﬂuence function approach, the Hessian matrix we leverage (the matrix X(cid:62)RX
in Deﬁnition 3.1) is positive semi-deﬁnite as it is computed with respect to the linearized model
rather than the original model. As a result, computing TRAK does not require the use of additional
regularization (beyond the one implicitly induced by our use of random projections), which is
practically necessary in the inﬂuence function approach. Prior works also leverage a similar
Hessian matrix based on the generalized Gauss-Newton matrix [BNL+22] or the equivalent Fisher
information matrix [TBG+21], which are guaranteed to be positive semi-deﬁnite.

Neural tangent kernel. The neural tangent kernel (NTK) [JGH18] and its generalizations [YL21]
are widely studied as a tool for theoretically analyzing generalization [ADH+19], optimization
[WLL+19], and robustness [GCL+19] of (overparameterized) neural networks. While these works
focus on neural networks in the their large or inﬁnite-width limit, a line of recent works [MLL20;
AGR+21; Lon21; ABP22; WHS22; MWY+22; ABS+23; MGF22] studies instead the ﬁnite-width
empirical NTK (eNTK). Our TRAK estimator is partly motivated by the observation from this line of
work that kernel regression with the eNTK provides a good approximation to the original model.
While we leverage the eNTK approximation for data attribution, prior works leveraged the NTK
and eNTK for various other applications, such as studying generalization [BHL22], sample selection
for active learning [HZK+22], model selection [DAR+21], federated learning [YWK+22], and fast
domain adaptation [MTM+21]. Our reduction to the linear case (Step 1 in Section 3.2) is analogous
to the approach of Bachmann et al. [BHL22] that leverages formulas for the leave-one-out error of
kernel methods coupled with the NTK approximation to estimate the generalization error. Another
related work is that of Zhang and Zhang [ZZ22], who theoretically characterize the accuracy of the
Hessian-based inﬂuence function in the NTK regime (i.e., large-width limit).

Finally, although the work on NTK popularized the idea of leveraging gradients as features,

similar ideas can be traced back to works on the Fisher kernel and related ideas [ZDS17].

Kernel methods and random projections. Our application of random projections to improve
computational efﬁciency of kernel approximation is a widely used idea in kernel methods [Blu06;
RR07]. Aside from computational advantages, this technique can also provide insight into empirical
phenomena. For example, Malladi et al. [MWY+22] use the kernel view along with random
projections as a lens to explain the efﬁcacy of subspace-based ﬁnetuning methods.

7 Discussion & Conclusion

In our work, we formalize the problem of data attribution and introduce a new method, TRAK, that
is effective and efﬁciently scalable. We then demonstrate the usefulness of TRAK in a variety of
large-scale settings: image classiﬁers trained on CIFAR and ImageNet, language models (BERT
and mT5), and image-text models (CLIP).

Still, TRAK is not without limitations: in particular, it requires the model to be differentiable, and
its effectiveness also depends on the suitability of the linear approximation. That said, the success
of the applying the NTK on language modeling tasks [MWY+22] as well as our own experiments
both suggest that this approximation is likely to continue to work for larger models. TRAK presents
a unique opportunity to reap the beneﬁts of data attribution in previously untenable domains, such
as large generative models. In Appendix G, we further discuss possible avenues for future work.

24

Acknowledgements

We thank Ekin Akyurek for help installing and using the FTRACE-TREX benchmark.

Work supported in part by the NSF grants CNS-1815221 and DMS-2134108, and Open Philan-
thropy. This material is based upon work supported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA) under Contract No. HR001120C0015.

Research was sponsored by the United States Air Force Research Laboratory and the United
States Air Force Artiﬁcial Intelligence Accelerator and was accomplished under Cooperative
Agreement Number FA8750-19-2-1000. The views and conclusions contained in this document
are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the ofﬁcial policies, either
expressed or implied, of the United States Air Force or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government
is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any
copyright notation herein.