---
paper_id: 2305.13546
source: arxiv
title: Neural Functional Transformers
converted_at: 2026-03-19T01:18:34.062759
note: "Content extracted before References section"
---

Neural Functional Transformers

Allan Zhou1 Kaien Yang1 Yiding Jiang2 Kaylee Burns1
Winnie Xu1

J. Zico Kolter2 Chelsea Finn1

Samuel Sokota2

3
2
0
2

y
a
M
2
2

]

G
L
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
4
5
3
1
.
5
0
3
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

1Stanford University

2Carnegie Mellon University

anonymous@anonymous.org

Abstract

The recent success of neural networks as implicit representation of data has driven
growing interest in neural functionals: models that can process other neural net-
works as input by operating directly over their weight spaces. Nevertheless, con-
structing expressive and efficient neural functional architectures that can handle
high-dimensional weight-space objects remains challenging. This paper uses the
attention mechanism to define a novel set of permutation equivariant weight-space
layers and composes them into deep equivariant models called neural functional
Transformers (NFTs). NFTs respect weight-space permutation symmetries while
incorporating the advantages of attention, which have exhibited remarkable success
across multiple domains. In experiments processing the weights of feedforward
MLPs and CNNs, we find that NFTs match or exceed the performance of prior
weight-space methods. We also leverage NFTs to develop INR2ARRAY, a novel
method for computing permutation invariant latent representations from the weights
of implicit neural representations (INRs). Our proposed method improves INR
classification accuracy by up to +17% over existing methods. We provide an
implementation of our layers at https://github.com/AllanYangZhou/nfn.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have emerged as flexible modeling tools applicable to a wide variety of different
fields, ranging from natural language processing to vision to the natural sciences. The sub-field of
implicit neural representations (INRs) has achieved significant success in using neural networks to
represent data such as 3D surfaces or scenes [32, 30, 37]. This has fueled interest in techniques that
directly operate in weight space to modify or extract information from a neural network through
its weights or gradients. However, developing models that can process weight-space objects is
challenging due to their high dimensional nature. As a consequence, some existing methods for
processing datasets of weights assume a restricted training process that reduces the effective weight
space [9, 3, 6].

In contrast, we follow recent work in building permutation equivariant weight-space models called
neural functionals, that can process neural network weights1 without such restrictions [31, 46].
In particular, this work concerns neural functionals that are equivariant to permutations of the
weights that correspond to re-arranging neurons. These weight-space permutations, known as neuron
permutation symmetries, exactly preserve the network’s behavior (see examples in Figure 1). Since
equivariance to neuron permutations is typically a useful inductive bias for weight-space tasks, neural
functionals achieve superior generalization compared to non-equivariant architectures. Despite this,
their performance on weight-space tasks remains significantly worse than convolutional networks’
performance on analogous image-space tasks [31, 46], suggesting that neural functional architectures
can be significantly improved.

1For clarity, we use “weights” (and “weight space”) to describe the weights (and space they belong to) for the
network being processed by a neural functional. We use “parameters” for the weights of the neural functional.

Preprint. Under review.

While existing neural functionals rely on linear layers (analogous to convolution), some of the
most successful architectures in other domains, such as Transformers [41, 8], rely on nonlinear
attention mechanisms. Motivated by this fact, our work develops novel equivariant weight-space
layers based on attention. While naive self-attention between input weights is permutation equivariant,
it cannot distinguish true neuron permutation symmetries (which preserve network behavior) from
“false” permutation symmetries2 (which do not preserve network behavior). In contrast, we prove
that our weight-space self-attention layer is minimally equivariant: it is equivariant to only neuron
permutations, which are the actual weight-space symmetries.

When composed into deep architectures, our weight-space attention layers give rise to neural func-
tional transformers (NFTs). As an immediate application, we use NFTs to develop INR2ARRAY,
a method for mapping INR weights into compact latent representations that are trained through
a reconstruction-based objective. INR2ARRAY produces permutation-invariant latents that can be
useful for downstream tasks such as INR classification. We also construct NFTs for a variety of other
tasks such as weight-space editing or generalization prediction.

NFTs are competitive with or outperform existing methods on each task without using more param-
eters. Notably, NFTs and INR2ARRAY improve downstream INR classification accuracy over the
best existing methods on multiple datasets, by up to +17%. Overall, our experiments show that
attention-based neural functionals can be more expressive and powerful than existing architectures
that rely on linear weight-space layers, leading to improved performance across weight-space tasks.

2 Preliminaries

Consider a feedforward network having ni neurons at each layer i = 0, · · · , L, including the input
and output layers. The network has weights3 W = (cid:8) W (i) ∈ Rni×ni−1 | i ∈
(cid:9) belonging
to weight space, W. More generally, we are interested in multi-channel weight space features
that can arise from stacking multiple weight space objects such as weights and gradients. For c-
channel weight-space features W ∈ W c, we have W = { W (i) ∈ Rni×ni−1×c | i ∈
} and
each W (i)

j,k,: ∈ Rc is a vector rather than a scalar.

jk := W (i)

1..L
(cid:75)

1..L
(cid:75)

(cid:74)

(cid:74)

Since the neurons in each hidden layer i ∈ {1, · · · , L − 1} have no inherent ordering, the feedforward
network is invariant to the symmetric group Sni of permutations of the neurons in layer i. We follow
Zhou et al. [46] in studying the neuron permutation (NP) group SNP := S0 × · · · × SnL, which
further assumes permutation symmetry of the input and output layers. Although this simplifying
assumption is usually too strong, it can be effectively corrected in practice using position encodings
at the input and output layers [46].

Consider a neuron permutation σ = (σ0, · · · , σL) ∈ SNP. Each σi permutes the neurons of layer
i, which correspond to the output space (rows) of W (i−1) and the input space (columns) of W (i).
Hence the action on weight space features W ∈ W c is denoted σW , where

[σW ](i)

jk = W (i)
σ−1
i

(j),σ−1

i−1(k)

,

σ = (σ0, · · · , σL) ∈ SNP.

(1)

As illustrated in Figure 1, a neuron permutation must always permute the columns of W (i) and the
rows of W (i−1) simultaneously in order to preserve network behavior.

This work is focused on principled architecture design for neural functionals, i.e., architectures that
process weight space features [46]. Recent work has shown the benefit of incorporating neuron
permutation symmetries into neural functional architectures by enforcing equivariance (or invariance)
to neuron permutation symmetries [31, 46]. Consider weight-space function classes parameterized by
θ ∈ Θ. We say that a function class f : W c × Θ → W c is SNP-equivariant if permuting the input
by any σ ∈ SNP always has the same effect as permuting the output by σ:

σf (W ; θ) = f (σW ; θ),

(2)
Similarly, a function class f : W c × Θ → R is SNP-invariant if f (σW ; θ) = f (W ; θ) for all σ, W,
and θ.

∀σ ∈ SNP, W ∈ W c, θ ∈ Θ.

2Moreover, naive self-attention between input weights is computationally intractable.
3For simplicity, we omit the biases from our discussion here, see the Appendix for full detail.

2

W (i+1)

W (i+1)

W (i)

W (i)

· · ·

σi+1

σi

· · ·

· · ·

τi

˜τ

· · ·

σi

σi−1

τi

Figure 1: Left: An illustration of how neuron permutations σ = (σ0, · · · , σL) act on weight matrices
W = (W (0), · · · , W (L)). Each σi simultaneously permutes the rows and columns of adjacent weight
matrices W (i), W (i+1). Right: Two examples of false symmetries, i.e., permutations that don’t
preserve network behavior: (1) when τi permutes the rows and columns of adjacent matrices permute
differently and (2) when ˜τ permutes weights across layers.

Our weight-space layers build off of the dot-product attention mechanism, which takes a query q and
a set of N key-value pairs { (kp, vp) }N

p=1 and computes, in the single-headed case:

(cid:16)

ATTN

q, { (kp, vp) }N

p=1

(cid:17)

=

(cid:88)

vp

p

(cid:32)

exp(q · kp)
p′ exp(q · kp′)

(cid:80)

(cid:33)

.

(3)

If all q, kp, vp are vectors in Rd, then the output is also a vector in Rd. The definition extends to
the situation where q, k, vp are multi-dimensional arrays of equal shape, by taking the dot product
between these arrays in the natural way. We can also use multi-headed attention ([41]) without
significant modification.

3 Neural Functional Transformers

We now introduce two attention-based layers for processing weight-space features: weight-space
self-attention (which is SNP-equivariant) and weight-space cross-attention (which is SNP-invariant).
We then describe how to compose these layers into deep architectures called neural functional
transformers (NFTs).

3.1 Equivariant weight-space self-attention

A key concept motivating the design of our weight-space self-attention layer is the distinction between
actual NP symmetries SNP that preserve network behavior, and other permutations of the weights
that can generally change network behavior. For example, consider a τ ∈ Sdim(W) that permutes the
columns of W (i) differently from the rows of W (i−1) or that moves weights between different weight
matrices (see Figure 1). Such permutations of the weight space are called “false symmetries” [31]
since they generally modify network behavior. We are interested in equivariance to the actual weight-
space symmetries (neuron permutations) but not to any false symmetries, a property we call minimal
equivariance:
Definition 1. A function class f : W c × Θ → W c is minimally SNP-equivariant if it is SNP-
equivariant (Eq. 2), but not equivariant to any false symmetries. More precisely, for any τ ∈ Sdim(W)
such that τ /∈ SNP, there exist a W ∈ W c and θ ∈ Θ such that f (τ W ; θ) ̸= τ f (W ; θ).

Consider naive self-attention between the dim(W) weights { W (i)
jk }, which would be equivariant to
any weight-space permutation. This would be SNP-equivariant, but would also be equivariant to any
false permutation symmetries, meaning that it is not minimally equivariant. In other words, naive
self-attention is overly constrained by too many symmetries, including those that are not actually
relevant to weight-space tasks.
Our weight-space self-attention layer SA(·; θQ, θK, θV ) : W c → W c is more sensitive to the
distinction between neuron permutations and false symmetries. It operates on weight-space features
with c channels and is parameterized by query/key/value projection matrices θQ, θK, θV ∈ Rc×c.

3

Each entry of the output feature is computed:

SA (W ; θQ, θK, θV )(i)

jk = ATTN

+ ATTN

+ ATTN

(cid:18)

Q(i)
j,: ,

(cid:18)

Q(i)
:,k,

(cid:110)

(cid:110)

(cid:110)

(cid:16)

Q(i)
jk ,

Q(i)

j,k := θQW (i)

jk , K (i)

(K, V )(i−1)

:,q

(cid:111)ni−2

(cid:91) (cid:110)

q=1

(K, V )(i)
p,:

(K, V )(i)
:,q

(cid:111)ni−1

(cid:91) (cid:110)

q=1

(K, V )(i+1)

p,:

(cid:111)ni

(cid:19)

p=1

(cid:111)ni+1

k
(cid:19)

p=1

j

(K, V )(s)
pq

j,k := θKW (i)
jk ,
(cid:16)
K (i)

, where

(cid:111)(cid:17)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12) ∀s, p, q
V (i)
j,k := θV W (i)
jk ,
(cid:17)
jk , V (i)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

jk is shorthand for the tuple

and the notation (K, V )(i)
general version of this layer, which handles inputs with both weights and biases.
The final term (Eq. 6) is simply naive self-attention between the inputs { W (i)
jk ∈ Rc }, but the first
two terms give the layer additional structure relevant to neuron permutations in particular. They
amount to self-attention between the rows and columns of adjacent weights W (i) and W (i−1) , shown
here for a single channel (c = 1):

. Appendix A.2 defines the more

jk






−−W (i)
1,: −−
...
−−W (i)
ni,:−−










−
−
W (i−1)
:,1
−
−

−
−

· · · W (i−1)
:,ni−2
−
−



 .

(8)

Self-attention between these ni + ni−2 vectors is only equivariant if the rows of W (i−1) and columns
of W (i) permute simultaneously, which neuron permutations do.
Since neuron permutations never permute weights between different layers W (i) and W (i′), we may
additionally use learned layer position encodings { ϕ(i) ∈ Rc | i ∈
} to prevent equivariance
to such permutations:

1..L
(cid:75)

(cid:74)

LAYERENC

(cid:16)

L
W ; { ϕ(i) }
i=1

(cid:17)(i)

jk

= W (i)

jk + ϕ(i).

(9)

We can now compose self-attention with position encoding to obtain SA ◦ LAYERENC.
Theorem 3.1 (Minimal equivariance). The combined layer SA ◦ LAYERENC is minimally SNP-
equivariant.

Proof (Sketch). To show equivariance: LAYERENC is clearly equivariant to neuron permutations. We
can check SA(σW )(i)
by expanding the left hand side term-by-term using
the definition (Eq. 4). To show non-equivariance to false symmetries: we can broadly classify false
symmetries into three types and check non-equivariance to each of them. Appendix A.1 provides the
full proof.

jk = SA(W )(i)
σ−1
i

(j),σ−1

i−1(k)

Practical considerations. The final term of SA (Eq. 6) amounts to self-attention between each
jk ∈ Rc and requires O (cid:0)(dim W)2c(cid:1) operations, which is usually intractable.
weight-space feature W (i)
j,k W (i)
In practice, we replace this term by a self-attention between the row-column sums W (i)
jk
of each weight matrix. This preserves interaction between weight-space features in different weight
matrices, while reducing the computational complexity to O (cid:0)L2c(cid:1). One can verify that this simplified
version also maintains minimal SNP-equivariance. Meanwhile, consider the self-attention operation
required to compute the first two terms of SA (depicted in Eq. 8). If ni = n for all i, then the first
two terms require O(Ln3c) operations, which is feasible for moderate n but can become expensive
when processing very wide networks. As a result, weight-space attention layers are usually more
computationally expensive than linear weight-space layers.

⋆,⋆ = (cid:80)

3.2

Invariant weight-space cross-attention

Stacking weight-space self-attention layers produces equivariant weight-space features, but some
situations require producing an SNP-invariant output. Existing approaches achieve invariance by
relying on a summation or maximization over the rows and columns of each input W (i) [31, 46].

4

Figure 2: An illustration of our weight-space cross-attention layer, which pools weight-space features
into a set of SNP-invariant vectors. The layer uses a set of learned queries Q ∈ RM ×c to attend over
keys and values produced from the weight space features.

It is natural to extend these existing invariant layers by using attention over the input’s entries, which
has similar permutation invariant properties as summation and maximization. Our weight-space
cross-attention layer CA : W c → Rd is simply a cross attention between a learned query e ∈ Rd and
the set keys and values produced from weight-space features { W (i)

CA (W ; e, θK, θV ) = ATTN

(cid:110) (cid:16)

(cid:16)

e,

θKW (s)

pq , θV W (s)
pq

(cid:111)(cid:17)

,

(10)

jk ∈ Rc }:
(cid:17) (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12) ∀s, p, q

with θK, θV ∈ Rd×c being learned projection matrices. By repeating this operation with M different
learned embeddings e1, · · · , eM , we can easily extend this into an invariant map W c → RM ×d. We
depict the operation of the multi-embedding case in Figure 2.

3.3 Convolutional weight spaces

Although our description thus far focuses on fully-connected weight-space features W , we can also
extend our layers to convolutional weight spaces. Suppose W is the c-channel weight-space feature
corresponding to a 1D convolutional network with filter widths ki at each layer i. It contains matrices
W (i) ∈ Rni×ni−1×ki×c. As in Zhou et al. [46], the filter dimension ki can be folded into the channel
dimension, creating a feature in Rni×ni−1×(kic) with kic channels. The problem is that ki may not be
consistent across all i, while dot-product attention operations require that the channel dimensions for
each W (i) match. We solve this problem by choosing a shared channel size ˜c and using learned linear
projections PROJi : Rni×ni−1×(kic) → Rni×ni−1×˜c to guarantee matching channel dimensions. The
output of SA(·) can then be restored to the original channel dimension by another set of learned
linear projections UNPROJi : Rni×ni−1×˜c → Rni×ni−1×ki×c.

3.4 Building Neural Functional Transformers

Following Transformer architecture design [41], we form stackable “blocks” that combine weight-
space self attention with LayerNorm, pointwise MLPs, and residual connections. Each block maps
W c → W c and preserves SNP-equivariance:

BLOCK(W ) = Z + MLP(LN(Z))
Z = W + SA(LN(W )),

(11)
(12)
where both the MLP : Rc → Rc and LayerNorm LN : Rc → Rc operate “pointwise,” or indepen-
dently on each input W (i)
jk . Since pointwise operations are permutation equivariant, the overall block
is an SNP-equivariant map on W c. To build neural functional Transformers (NFTs), we stack multiple
blocks into a deep equivariant architecture. For tasks which require SNP-invariance, like classification
or learning an invariant latent space of weights (Section 4), we can apply weight-space cross-attention
on top of the features produced by the final BLOCK(·). The invariant activations produced by CA(·)
can then be fed into an MLP that produces the final output.

5

W(2)W(1)Flatten｝Weight-space FeaturesWQOutputA(Q,K)K=θkWProjectV=θvWProjectKVTA(Q,K)VTAdditionally, the NFT’s input is often one or a few channels, while our desired hidden channel
dimension may be significantly larger (e.g., c = 256). We can apply any function g : Rc1 → Rc2 to
each W (i)
jk ∈ Rc1 to project from the input channel dimension to the hidden channel dimension while
preserving equivariance. In our experiments, we use random Fourier features [35] to achieve this
projection.

4

INR2ARRAY: Learning an invariant latent space for weights

An application of interest for weight-space architectures is to learn a compact latent representation
of weights, which can be useful for downstream tasks such as classifying the signal represented
by an implicit neural representation (INR). The recently introduced INR2VEC [6] can learn a rep-
resentation of INR weights by using a reconstruction objective, but requires every INR share the
same initialization. In this section, we leverage neural functionals to extend the INR2VEC framework
to the independent initialization setting, which is significantly more challenging but removes any
restrictions on the INR training process.

INR2VEC uses an encoder-decoder setup to map INR weights into useful latent representations. We
make two key changes to the original INR2VEC formulation:

1. We implement the encoder with an SNP-invariant neural functional transformer (NFT). This
guarantees that the latent representation is invariant to neuron permutations of the weights.
2. We allow the latent representation to be a spatially meaningful array of vectors. In particular,
each vector in the latent array is responsible for encoding a single spatial patch of the INR.

The first modification is a useful inductive bias because the signal represented by an INR should be
invariant to neuron permutations. The second modification is inspired by Spatial Functa [3], which
found that giving INR latent spaces spatial structure was helpful in their meta-learning setting. We
call our representation learning approach INR2ARRAY due to its modified latent space structure.
The following explanation focuses on 2D INRs that represent images on the coordinate grid [−1, 1]2,
though the general case follows naturally. We first split the coordinate grid into M spatial patches
P1 ∪ · · · ∪ PM = [−1, 1]2. Given a SIREN(·; W ), INR2ARRAY uses an SNP-invariant NFT encoder
ENCθ(·) to map weights W to a latent array of M vectors, z ∈ RM ×d. The decoder DECθ : Rd → W
(cid:111)
, one for each vector zi := zi,: ∈ Rd. Each ˆWi(zi)
produces a set of weights
is responsible for parameterizing the SIREN only for the spatial patch Pi ⊂ [−1, 1]2. The objective
is to reconstruct the original INR’s content using the decoded weights:

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12) i = 1, · · · , M

(cid:110) ˆWi

L(θ, W ) =

M
(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:16)

SIREN

(cid:16)

x; ˆWi

(cid:17)

− SIREN (x; W )

(cid:17)2

,

i=1

x∈Pi

ˆWi = DECθ(zi),

z = ENCθ(W ).

(13)

(14)

Our INR2ARRAY encoder architecture uses multiple weight-space self-attention layers followed
by a weight-space cross-attention layer CA, which is especially well-suited for producing M × d
permutation invariant arrays. For the decoder, we use the hypernetwork design of Sitzmann et al.
[37], where the hypernetworks are conditioned on the spatial latent zi ∈ Rd. In principle, one can
also design an invariant encoder using (non-attentive) NFN layers, and we will compare both options
in our experiments.

5 Experiments

Our experiments broadly involve two types of weight-space datasets: (1) datasets of neural networks
(e.g., CNN image classifiers) trained with varying hyperparameters, where the goal is to model inter-
esting properties of the trained networks (e.g., generalization) from their weights; and (2) datasets
containing the weights of INRs each representing a single data signal, such as an image. Tasks in-
cluding editing INR weights to modify the represented signal, or predicting target information related
to the signal (e.g., image class). For our INR experiments, we construct datasets for MNIST [25],
FashionMNIST [42], and CIFAR-10 [23] following the procedure of Zhou et al. [46] exactly.

6

Figure 3: INR2ARRAY reconstructions for random samples from each INR dataset. The NFT encoder
produces higher qualitatively better reconstructed SIRENs on each dataset, especially CIFAR-10.
Blocking artifacts are due to the spatial latent structure, and suggest further room for improvement.

5.1

INR classification with INR2ARRAY

Classifying the signal represented by an INR directly from its weights is a challenging problem, with
current approaches requiring that all INRs share initialization [10, 3, 6]. In the “vanilla” setting where
INRs can be initialized and trained independently, state-of-the-art methods struggle to classify signals
from even simple datasets [31, 46]. We train INR2ARRAY to learn a latent representation of INR
weights that can be used for more effective classification in this vanilla setting.

We implement both NFT (weight-space self-attention and cross-attention) and NFNNP [46] variants
of the INR2ARRAY encoder, and distinguish the two variants by superscripts: INR2ARRAYNFT
and INR2ARRAYNFN. For the decoder, we use the hypernetwork design of Sitzmann et al. [37],
where the hypernetworks are conditioned on the spatial latent zi ∈ Rd. Appendix B.3 describes the
implementation and training of each variant in full detail.

We train separate encoders for each INR dataset shown in Table 5 of the appendix, which reports the
reconstruction mean square error (Eq 13) on test INR inputs. The NFT encoder consistently achieves
lower reconstruction error than the NFN encoder, and INR2ARRAYNFT also produces qualitatively
better reconstructions than INR2ARRAYNFN (Figure 3), confirming that NFTs enable higher quality
encoding than previous neural functionals.

Once trained, the INR2ARRAY encoder maps INR weights to compact latent arrays that represent
the INR’s contents. Downstream tasks such as classifying the INR’s signal (e.g., image) can now
be performed directly on these SNP-invariant latent arrays z ∈ RM ×d. Concretely, in K-way
classification the trained encoder ENC : W → RM ×d can be composed with any classification head
f : RM ×d → RK to form an SNP-invariant classifier f ◦ ENC : W → RK. Since the encoder is
already trained by the reconstruction objective, we only train f during classification and keep the
encoder fixed. We choose to implement f using a Transformer classification head [41], which views
the latent array input as a length-M sequence of d-dimensional vectors.

Existing INR classifiers, which we refer to as DWS [31] and NFN [46], are permutation-invariant
architectures that directly map input weights to predicted labels. We also create a modified NFN
classifier (Spatial NFN) which produces an M × d array of activations before a convolutional
classifier head, to test the impact of spatial latents independent of the INR2ARRAY training process.
Appendix B.4 describes the setup for each method in further detail.

Table 1 shows that INR2ARRAY significantly improves classification test accuracies across the board.
In addition, the best performance is achieved by implementing the encoder using our attention-based
layers (NFT) compared to linear weight-space layers (NFN). Notably, INR2ARRAYNFT achieves
a test accuracy of 64.4% on CIFAR-10 (the hardest dataset), an improvement of +17% over the
previous best result of 46.6% by NFNs. They also achieve an MNIST test accuracy of 98.5%, up
from 92.9% by NFNs and 85.7% by DWS. Meanwhile, Spatial NFN fails to improve performance
over standard NFN classifiers, implying that INR2ARRAY is crucial to make the spatial latent space
useful. The results show that learning a latent array representation of INR weights using INR2ARRAY
and NFTs can greatly improve performance on downstream INR tasks like classification.

5.2 Editing INRs

We also evaluate NFTs on editing INR weights to alter their signal, e.g., to modify the represented
image. The goal of this task is to edit the weights of a trained SIREN to alter its encoded image,

7

Table 1: Test accuracy (%) for weight-space INR classification in the MNIST, FashionMNIST, and
CIFAR-10 datasets. INR2ARRAY significantly improves over current state-of-the-art results in this
setting. For the NFN baseline [46] we report the higher performance out of their NP and HNP
variants. Uncertainties indicate standard error over three runs.

DWS [31]
NFN [46]
Spatial NFN
INR2ARRAYNFN (Ours)
INR2ARRAYNFT (Ours)

MNIST

FashionMNIST

CIFAR-10

85.7 ± 0.57
92.9 ± 0.38
92.9 ± 0.46

65.5 ± 0.48
75.6 ± 1.07
70.8 ± 0.53

–
46.6 ± 0.13
45.6 ± 0.11

94.6 ± 0.00
98.5 ± 0.00

76.7 ± 0.00
79.3 ± 0.00

45.4 ± 0.00
63.4 ± 0.00

Table 2: Test mean squared error to the target visual transformation for five INR editing tasks. NFTs
generally achieve lower test error than NFN variants. Uncertainties indicate standard error over three
seeds.

MNIST (erode)
MNIST (dilate)
MNIST (gradient)

NFNHNP [46]
0.0228 ± 0.0003
0.0706 ± 0.0005
0.0607 ± 0.0013

NFNNP [46]
0.0223 ± 0.0000
0.0693 ± 0.0009
0.0566 ± 0.0000

NFT (Ours)

0.0194 ± 0.0002
0.0510 ± 0.0004
0.0484 ± 0.0007

FashionMNIST (gradient)

0.0878 ± 0.0002

0.0870 ± 0.0001

0.0800 ± 0.0002

CIFAR (contrast)

0.0204 ± 0.0000

0.0203 ± 0.0000

0.0200 ± 0.0002

expressed as a difference W ′ ← W + ∆(W ). Neural functionals are trained to learn ∆(·) that
achieves some desired visual transformation, such as dilating the image. Permutation equivariance is
a useful inductive bias here since if ∆(W ) is the desired edit for W , then for any neuron permutation
σ the desired edit to σW is σ∆(W ). In addition to the MNIST dilation and CIFAR contrast tasks
from Zhou et al. [46], we also introduce several new editing tasks: MNIST erosion, MNIST gradient,
and FashionMNIST gradient. Gradient tasks roughly anount to edge detection; Figure 4 in the
appendix shows sample inputs and targets for each editing task.

We compare NFT editing performance against the two NFN variants [46], with each method using the
a similar number of parameters (∼ 7M). For full training details, see Appendix B.2). Table 2 shows
the test mean square error (MSE) between the edited INR and the ground truth visual transformation.
NFTs consistently outperform NFNs on most INR editing tasks. In addition, Table 4 in the appendix
shows that NFTs generally obtain both lower training and test error, indicating that the attention-based
architecture enables greater expressivity. Figure 4 shows qualitative samples produced by each editing
method on each task.

5.3 Predicting CNN classifier generalization

Whereas the previous experiments have focused on the weight spaces of INRs (which are implemented
by small MLPs), we would also like to evaluate how NFTs process other weight spaces such as those
belonging to convolutional neural network classifiers. Large-scale empirical studies have produced
datasets of trained classifiers under different hyperparameter settings [40, 11], enabling a data-driven

Table 3: (Small CNN Zoo [40] benchmark.) Rank correlation τ for predicting the generaliza-
tion of CNN image classifiers with unseen hyperparameters trained CIFAR-10-GS and SVHN-GS
(GS=grayscale). The NFT outperforms NFNNP and hand-picked features (STATNN), while NFNHNP
performs best overall. Uncertainties indicate standard error over two runs.

CIFAR-10-GS
SVHN-GS

NFNHNP [46]
0.934 ± 0.001
0.931 ± 0.005

NFNNP [46]
0.922 ± 0.001
0.856 ± 0.001

STATNN [40]

NFT (Ours)

0.915 ± 0.002
0.843 ± 0.000

0.926 ± 0.001
0.858 ± 0.000

8

approach to modeling generalization from their weights, which could lead to new insights. Prior
methods for predicting classifier generalization typically rely on extracting hand-designed features
from the weights before using them to predict the test accuracy [18, 43, 40, 19, 28].

We now study how NFTs can model generalization from raw weights using the Small CNN Zoo [40],
which contains thousands of CNNs trained on image classification datasets. In addition to comparing
against the two neural functional variants NFNNP and NFNHNP [46], we also show the performance of
a hand-designed features approach called STATNN [40]. Each generalization predictor is trained on
thousands of CNN weights produced under varying initialization and optimization hyperparameters,
and is then tested on held out weights produced using unseen hyperparameters. Appendix B.1
describes the experimental setup in full detail.

Table 3 shows the test performance of each method using the Kendall rank correlation coefficient
τ [20]. Across both datasets, neural functionals operating on raw weights outperform the hand-
designed features baseline STATNN. NFTs slightly outperform NFNNP on each dataset, while
NFNHNP achieves the best performance overall. Note that both NFNNP and NFTs use layers that
assume input and output neurons are permutable (NP). Although we use input/output position
encoding to remove the stronger NP assumptions, the results suggest that HNP designs may be
naturally better suited to this task.

6 Related Work

It is well known that the weight spaces of neural networks contain numerous symmetries, i.e.,
transformations that preserve the network’s behavior [17]. Permutation symmetries in particular
have been studied in the context of neural network loss landscapes [14, 4, 12] and weight-space
merging [38, 1]. However, most prior methods for processing weight space objects do not explicitly
account for these symmetries [2, 26, 15, 24, 45, 7, 21], although some have tried to encourage
permutation equivariance through data augmentation [33, 29]. Another workaround approach is
to explicitly restrict the weight space being considered by, for example, fixing the initialization of
all networks being processed [6] or meta-learning modulations of a set of base parameters [10, 3].
Instead, we study the problem of encoding permutation symmetries into the neural functional itself,
without any restrictions on the weight space being processed.

There are a variety of methods that incorporate symmetries into deep neural network architectures [36,
22, 13]. Examples include (group) convolutions for images [25, 5] and permutation equivariant
architectures for general set-structured inputs [34, 44, 16, 39, 27]. Most directly related to our work
are that of Navon et al. [31] and Zhou et al. [46], who introduce linear layers equivariant to the neuron
permutation symmetries of feedforward networks. We extend their approach by introducing nonlinear
equivariant layers based on the attention mechanism, and use them to construct NFTs.

7 Conclusion

This work introduces neural functional transformers, a novel class of weight-space models designed
with neuron permutation symmetries in mind. Our approach extends recent work on permutation-
equivariant weight-space models using nonlinear self-attention and cross-attention layers, which can
enable greater expressivity compared to existing linear layers.

We empirically evaluate the effectiveness of NFTs on weight-space tasks involving datasets of trained
CNN classifiers and implicit neural representations (INRs). Operating on weights alone, NFTs can
predict the test accuracy of CNN classifiers, modify the content of INRs, and classify INR signals.
We also use NFTs to develop INR2ARRAY, a method for mapping INR weights to compact and
SNP-invariant latent representations, which significantly improve performance in downstream tasks
such as INR classification.

Some limitations of NFTs include increased computational costs from self-attention relative to linear
weight-space layers, and the difficulty of training large NFT architectures stably. Future work may
address these limitations, and explore additional applications of NFTs such as for learned optimization
or weight-space generative modeling. Overall, our work highlights the potential of attention-based
weight-space layers offers a promising direction for the development of more expressive and powerful
neural functional architectures.

9

Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding

We thank Adriano Cardace and Anonymousho Lee for interesting discussions and suggestions related to
the development of this paper. AZ and KB are supported by the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship
Program. This project was supported by Juniper Networks and ONR grant N00014-22-1-2621.