---
paper_id: 2409.09603
source: arxiv
title: Towards Data-Centric RLHF: Simple Metrics for Preference Dataset Comparison
converted_at: 2026-05-12T08:17:24.849952
note: "Content extracted before References section"
---

4
2
0
2

p
e
S
5
1

]
I

A
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
0
6
9
0
.
9
0
4
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Towards Data-Centric RLHF: Simple Metrics for
Preference Dataset Comparison

Judy Hanwen Shen∗
Stanford University
anonymous@anonymous.org

Archit Sharma
Stanford University
anonymous@anonymous.org

Jun Qin
Apple
anonymous@anonymous.org

Abstract

The goal of aligning language models to human preferences requires data that
reveal these preferences. Ideally, time and money can be spent carefully collecting
and tailoring bespoke preference data to each downstream application. However, in
practice, a select few publicly available preference datasets are often used to train
reward models for reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). While
new preference datasets are being introduced with increasing frequency, there are
currently no existing efforts to measure and compare these datasets. In this paper,
we systematically study preference datasets through three perspectives: scale, label
noise, and information content. We propose specific metrics for each of these
perspectives and uncover different axes of comparison for a better understanding
of preference datasets. Our work is a first step towards a data-centric approach
to alignment by providing perspectives that aid in training efficiency and iterative
data collection for RLHF.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) is typically the final stage of the modern large
language model (LLM) training pipeline [1, 2, 3]. The reward models necessary for RLHF algorithms
are predominantly trained from datasets of pairwise preferences [4, 5]. While a substantial number
of works have focused on new algorithms for learning from preference data to better train reward
models [6, 7, 8, 9], relatively few works have examined qualities of these datasets themselves. At
the very minimum, all of these pairwise datasets of human preferences contain examples with 1) a
prompt, 2) two responses, and 3) an annotation of which response is preferred. Beyond this basic
structure, preference datasets vary widely in domain (e.g. code, chat, QA, etc.), generation process
(e.g. synthetic vs human), collection procedure (e.g. annotation, prompt generation), and even size
(e.g. 10k - 300k examples [7, 10]).

Ideally, a custom preference dataset for each specific application can be collected, and carefully
labeled by multiple annotators for reward model training. New technical reports that accompany
state-of-the-art language models highlight the importance of preference data quality yet give little
to no details about the preference datasets used [11, 12]. Among publicly available preference
datasets, there is folk wisdom that more carefully curated datasets are better, yet no rigorous study or
methodology for comparing these datasets exists beyond summary statistics, such as token count [8].
Today, little is known about when and why one preference dataset may be better than another, nor
what “better” can mean in the context of these datasets.

∗Work done during internship at Apple

Preprint. Under review.

In this paper, we initiate the study of measuring properties of preference datasets for the purpose
of reward model training. A useful measurement should be robust to different base model choices
and applicable to any dataset containing pairwise preferences. To this end, we propose three data-
centric approaches for comparing preference datasets: effective sample size, noise invariance, and
information content. We evaluate both in-distribution performance and domain generalization (i.e.
through a standard reward modeling benchmark) on the induced reward model trained on these
datasets. We validate our results through ablations across different model sizes to demonstrate the
connection between these measurements and subsequent reward model performance. Together, our
work gives three simple but intuitive perspectives for understanding preference datasets that are
broadly applicable to the development of new datasets across domains.

2 Related Work

Data-Centric Methods Scaling laws introduced to describe the relationship between parameters,
data, and compute for pre-training have been widely accepted as the explanation for why larger models
and more data are better for language model training [13, 14]. Different approaches for improving
data quality and composition have been proposed as efficient alternatives for indiscriminately training
on all available data [15, 16]. However, the scale of pre-training data vastly eclipses the scale of data
used in the fine-tuning and RLHF stages. Data quality and data selection for reward model training
may be more similar to supervised learning settings than language modeling. In supervised learning
and supervised fine-tuning, careful data selection and pruning have been shown to lower the number of
samples required [17, 18, 19]. However, reward models do differ from the supervised learning setting
since they are adapted from these pre-trained base models. Recent work has studied data scaling for
fine-tuning LLMs to find that LLM performance benefits more from pre-training data scaling than
fine-tuning data scaling and the optimal fine-tuning method is task and data-dependent [20].

Publicly Available Preference Datasets For RLHF preference datasets in particular, early works
collected datasets on the order of tens of thousands of examples for reward model training. For
example, for a summarization task Stienon et al., [21] collected 64k preference pairs based on
Reddit prompts, while the WebGPT [22] reward model was trained with 16k preference pairs
based on prompts from existing QA datasets. Subsequent datasets follow a more general human-
assistant format while being much larger (e.g. OpenAssistant [23], HH-RLHF [4], Stanford Human
Preferences [24]). However, these datasets vary drastically in collection procedure. For example,
for InstructGPT and HH-RLHF humans were asked to rank model-generated responses while for
OpenAssistant and Stanford Human Preferences preferences for different human-generated responses
were gathered. More recently, preference datasets where both responses and rankings are synthetically
generated have gained popularity [10, 25]. These synthetically constructed datasets offers more
training samples and more diversity in terms of the topics generated. There is also a movement back
to creating smaller but carefully annotated preferences, often with multiple annotators [26]. Despite
the large variation in practices for generating these different datasets, there has been little comparison
and characterization of how different datasets affect reward model training.

Challenges of Reward Modeling and Learning from Human Preferences Defining data quality
is complex for preference data since many different tasks may use the same reward model for RLHF.
There are concerns with the representativeness of preferences as well as the alignment between
collected data and the intended objective [27, 28, 29]. One suggestion for measuring the effectiveness
of reward models is standardized benchmarks on reward model performance on a variety of common
tasks [30]. This approach measures the generalization of a single reward model on different tasks
by testing how well each reward model performs on scoring the chosen response higher. The top-
performing models on this benchmark leaderboard include models of a variety of sizes from 8B
to 340B parameters and a variety of preference data sizes from 10k to more than 700k examples.
Given this mishmash of different approaches, it is important to understand how to measure preference
data quality for the reward modeling step of RLHF. This work aims to characterize the elements of
preference data quality that inform practical decisions around data generation, annotation, and usage
in this setting.

2

3 Model Agnostic Data Metrics

3.1 Preliminaries

Let x be the prompt, yw be the winning (chosen) response, and yl be the losing (rejected) response.
i=1 ∼ D be the dataset of preferences that we will study. Let r : X × Y → R
Let D = {(x, yw, yl)i}n
be the reward model that maps a (x, y) prompt response pair to a score. In reward modeling, we want
to compare the rewards of two given generations. The Bradley-Terry model defines Yij as a Bernoulli
random variable representing the outcome of whether the completion yi is preferred or wins over the
completion yj. Under this model, Yij ∼ Bernoulli(pij) and the log ratio of the probability that yi
wins over yj is:

log

pij
1 − pij

= r(x, yi) − r(x, yj).

If we let yi be the winning completion yw and yj be the losing completion yl, we can then write the
probability of the reward model preferring yw as:

P (yw ≻ yl) =

exp(r(x, yw))
exp(r(x, yl)) + exp(r(x, yw))

.

Following prior work [5, 4], the probability of the reward model giving a higher score to the chosen
response can then be maximized directly through the following objective function:

L = −E(x,yw,yl)∼D [log σ(r(x, yw) − r(x, yl))] .

3.2 Datasets and Models

We examine four publicly available preference datasets in our study: Anthropic Helpful-Harmless
(HH-RLHF) [4], Ultrafeedback (ULTRAFEEDBACK) [10], LMSYS Arena Preferences (LMSYS) [31],
and PKU-SafeRLHF (SAFERLHF) [32]. These datasets are selected based on their frequent use
in prior works [4, 8]2. For each dataset, we examine their behavior on reward models trained from
pre-trained models of different sizes: 350 million (Opt-350m [33]), 1 billion (TinyLlama-1B-3T [34]),
and 7 billion parameters (Llama2-7B and Llama2-7B-Chat [2]). We focus predominately on reward
models trained from base models but also include ablations with fine-tuned versions since the practice
around reward model training varies. For example, some papers train reward models from checkpoints
already fine-tuned with instructions and human feedback (e.g. Llama3-8B-Instruct) [8]) and other
works train reward models directly from based models [26, 7]. Notably, Ouyang et. al. [5] remark that
similar reward model quality was observed between training on a base 6B model and an instruction-
tuned 6B model. We evaluate both in-domain and generalization performance through evaluation set
accuracy and Rewardbench [30] respectively.

4 Experiments

4.1 Scaling: Are larger preference datasets better?

The first perspective we examine is the role of dataset size for different preference datasets. Unlike
scaling laws for pre-training, there is no consensus about how large a preference dataset should be to
train a good reward model. For summarization in particular, Stienon et. al. [21] estimate that doubling
their particular dataset size leads to a 1.1% increase in reward model validation accuracy until 65k
examples. In contrast, others have found that even when using 2.9 million examples, reward model
accuracy continues to improve [2]. While these differences can be blamed on the dataset composition,
the impact of increasing the training set size across different datasets has not been studied. We
examine four datasets that range in size from 30k examples to 200k examples and observe how
training dataset size impacts performance. Figure 1 illustrates the impact of scaling on evaluation set
accuracy. For all datasets, the larger models (Llama2-7B, Llama2-7B-chat), gain less from doubling
the dataset size. While Llama2-7B-chat is fine-tuned with RLHF from part of HH-RLHF, this
pattern remains even for other datasets that were released after Llama2-7B-chat. Among datasets,
SAFERLHF has the highest average gain per doubling of the training dataset (2.4-4.7%) for all
models.

2We include dataset details in the supplementary materials

3

Figure 1: Scaling behavior when measuring evaluation set accuracy is dataset dependent.

Figure 2: Comparing RewardBench performance across different datasets for Llama2-7B-chat model.
Increasing the dataset size does not improve performance for most datasets on most tasks.

We also investigate the effect of increasing dataset size on a more general suite of reward model tasks
that might be outside the training distribution using RewardBench [30] (Figure 2). Unlike evaluation
accuracy, increasing dataset size does not always improve, and sometimes harms, performance on
this benchmark. Some datasets dominate a task across all sample sizes (e.g. ULTRAFEEDBACK on
Chat, HH-RLHF on Reasoning, and SAFERLHF on Safety). This shows that a small subset of
samples (e.g. 10K examples or 10% of a dataset) is already sufficient and that dataset composition
may be more important in achieving good performance than scale. For example, 10k examples from
SAFERLHF outperforms 140k examples from HH-RLHF. These results are model invariant across
different reward model sizes. For example, ULTRAFEEDBACK remains the best dataset for the Chat
category across both the 350M and 1B model3.

4.2 Noise Invariance: How robust are reward models to label noise?

Prior works have reported the human agreement with the collected preferences to be 76% for
summarization [21] and 73% inter-annotator agreement for response quality for general instruction
tasks [5]. Ideally, annotator disagreement serves as a filter for low-quality preference data, however,
even if the collection process is unknown, it is still useful to understand how much noise there
might be in the preference dataset. In image classification tasks, neural networks are robust to label
noise [35]. In these settings, a random label is used instead of the true label in multiclass classification.
In the context of preference data, we can model label noise as the flipping of the chosen response with
the rejected response. We can define: p as the noise rate and add random label noise by constructing
a dataset:

(x, yw, yl) =

(cid:26)(x, yl, yw) w.p. p
(x, yw, yl) w.p.

1 − p.

Table 1 shows the percentage of the peak evaluation set accuracy achieved when 30% of labels are
flipped. Overall, we find that reward model performance remains unaffected by label flipping until

3See Appendix D.1 for details

4

214215216217Samples0.550.600.650.700.750.800.85AccuracyHH-RLHFModel (Avg Gain. per Doubling)Llama2-7B-chat (0.010)Llama2-7B (0.018)TinyLlama-1B (0.021)opt350m (0.020)214215216217SamplesUltraFeedbackLlama2-7B-chat (0.013)Llama2-7B (0.016)TinyLlama-1B (0.022)opt350m (0.023)213214SamplesLMSYSLlama2-7B-chat (0.007)Llama2-7B (0.012)TinyLlama-1B (0.012)opt350m (0.020)213214SamplesSafeRLHFLlama2-7B-chat (0.023)Llama2-7B (0.024)TinyLlama-1B (0.047)opt350m (0.038)Evaluation Accuracy for Different Reward Model Sizes214215216217Samples0.8000.8250.8500.8750.9000.9250.9500.975ScoreChat214215216217Samples0.350.400.450.500.55ScoreChat Hard214215216217Samples0.30.40.50.60.70.8ScoreSafety214215216217Samples0.40.50.60.70.8ScoreReasoningDataset Size and Rewardbench Score Across Datasets Llama2-7B-chatSafeRLHFLMSYSUltraFeedbackHH-RLHFBase Model
Opt-350m
TinyLlama-1B
Llama2-7B
Llama2-7B-chat

HH-RLHF ULTRAFEEDBACK
95.0%
88.6%
95.4%
90.1%
93.3%
78.9%
93.6%
92.7%

LMSYS
94.9%
95.4%
94.6%
92.4%

SAFERLHF
92.6%
94.4%
84.9%
90.7%

Table 1: Percentage of total evaluation accuracy achieved with 30% of labels flipped for each dataset for
different sized reward models. ULTRAFEEDBACK and LMSYS are particularly noise invariant but all datasets
are fairly robust to label flipping.

Figure 4: The impact of noise on reward model confidence P (yw ≻ yl) on ULTRAFEEDBACK for RewardBench.
We see that as the noise rate (% of flipped labels) increases, the probability of the winning response being chosen
concentrates around 0.5. This phenomenon is similar across all models and datasets to different extents.

30-40% of labels are flipped. The same pattern is observed on RewardBench tasks across all models4.

Explaining Noise Invariance: The Role of Noise in Reward Model Confidence We can
look at the underlying prediction probabilities to further understand why introducing label noise
does not significantly affect performance both on the evaluation set and the RewardBench
tasks. Since accuracy for both sets of metrics is calculated through expected binary outcomes
(i.e. E(x,yw,yl)∼D [1[ˆy = yc]] where ˆy = arg maxy∈{yw,yl} r(x, y)), we can use the Bradley-
Terry model to calculate P (yw ≻ yl) and investigate how these distributions change. As the
noise rate increases, the distribution of probabilities (e.g. P (yw ≻ yl)) becomes more concen-
trated around 0.5 (Figure 4). This pattern is consistent across different reward model sizes and
datasets. Across different datasets, Figure 3 shows that when label noise is introduced, HH-
RLHF and LMSYS collapses quicker to P (yw ≻ yl) ≈ 0.5 than other datasets. This sug-
gests that there might be a higher level of baseline noise in the HH-RLHF labels that results
in more uncertain predictions. This pattern is again consistent across different reward model sizes.

To precisely characterize model confidence,
we can measure the expected calibration error
(ECE) of reward model outputs [36]. However,
in the Bradly-Terry model, using P (yw ≻ yl) di-
rectly as model confidence results in perfect ac-
curacy when P (yw ≻ yl) > 0.5. The only prior
work we could find that measures calibration in
reward models uses max{P (yw ≻ yl), P (yl ≻
yw)} as the confidence of the model [37]. To
properly measure calibration, we can write each
evaluation pair as (x, y1, y2, z) and split it into
(x, yw, yl, z = 1) and (x, yl, yw, z = 0). Then
to calculate the calibration error we can use
P (z = 1) := P (y1 ≻ y2) as model confidence
and plot the count of z = 1 as the accuracy (see
Figure 6). The overall ECE is equivalent to the
max method from prior work but now we have
confidence values in the entire interval of [0, 1]
instead of just [0.5, 1]. As label noise increases,

Figure 3: Empirical CDF of P (yw ≻ yl) for differ-
ent datasets at different noise levels for Llama 7B on
RewardBench. When there is no noise, some datasets
induce a more confident distribution even with the same
number of training examples. As more noise is added, all
probabilities shift towards 0.5 and the datasets become
indistinguishable

4Full plots and more details can be found in Appendix D.2

5

0.00.20.40.60.81.0P(ywyl)100101102103CountNo label noise added0.00.20.40.60.81.0P(ywyl)Noise Rate 0.10.00.20.40.60.81.0P(ywyl)Noise Rate 0.20.00.20.40.60.81.0P(ywyl)Noise Rate 0.30.00.20.40.60.81.0P(ywyl)Noise Rate 0.4Distribution of P(ywyl) on UltraFeedback scores at different noise rates for Llama2-7B-chat0.000.250.500.751.00P(ywyl)0.00.20.40.60.81.0Cumulative ProbabilityNoise Level: No NoisedatasetHH-RLHFUltraFeedbackLMSYSSafeRLHF0.000.250.500.751.00P(ywyl)Noise Level: 0.3datasetHH-RLHFUltraFeedbackLMSYSSafeRLHFCDF of Probability of correct output across datasets for Llama2-7BFigure 5: (Left) Distribution of cosine similarity of response pairs for different datasets. The HH-RLHF
dataset contains much more similar response pairs (e.g. (yw, yl)) than the ULTRAFEEDBACK dataset. (Right)
The evaluation set accuracy for training different models with “high information” or low response similarity data
compared to a random sample. The benefits of “high information” are most salient in the smallest model.

we observe lower calibration error (e.g. ECE=0.183 no noise to ECE=0.086 30% label noise for
ULTRAFEEDBACK) (see Section A for more details).

4.3

Information Content: Are high contrast responses necessary for reward model learning?

A major dichotomy in how preference datasets are generated is whether the responses are human-
written or sampled from large language models. For example, the Anthropic Helpful-Harmless
(HH-RLHF) dataset contains response pairs generated from responses from LLMs of the same
family [4]. In contrast, the Stanford Human Preference Dataset (SHP) dataset is gathered from
pairs of (presumably human) Reddit responses [24]. As responses are more similar in quality, prior
work has found that human annotation agreement reduces these responses [2]. While the relative
informativeness of an example for training a reward model is likely model-dependent, since the
models used for reward model training vary in training data, a minimal level of contrast between the
chosen and rejected response is likely a prerequisite for valuable examples in preference datasets.
Given the differences in response generation, we can compare and contrast different datasets by
computing the cosine similarity between embeddings of responses (i.e. 1 − dcos(yw, yl))5. Figure 5
shows that the HH-RLHF dataset has many more similar response pairs than ULTRAFEEDBACK. To
understand the impact of training with high-information examples, we created a threshold of 0.8 in
cosine similarity and designated the examples with a smaller similar as “high information". Fixing
the training set size, we compared the performance of training the high-information examples to a
random sample. Surprisingly, the results vary by model and dataset. For the larger models (i.e. 1B+
parameters), there is little difference between the high information and random training sets of the
same size. However, for the smaller 350 million parameter model, we see that the high information
examples often resulted in a better evaluation accuracy (Figure 5).

5 Discussion

Our work investigates three aspects of preference datasets to identify dataset differences and connect
these differences to downstream performance on both in- and out-domain tasks. Firstly, we find
that while preference datasets vary in size, a larger dataset is not better than a smaller dataset that
is more relevant to the task. Furthermore, increasing dataset size gives only marginal gains for
in-domain evaluation accuracy and may even hinder performance on out-of-domain tasks. Future
work introducing new preference datasets should report the marginal gain of using the entire dataset
on different models compared to using just 10-25% of the dataset.

Secondly, we find all four of the preference datasets we examine to be extremely noise invariant. We
attribute this observation to label noise introducing more uncertainty in reward model predictions
rather than prediction reversal. This suggests that better preference datasets can tolerate a higher level
of label noise. Future work introducing new preference datasets should report the noise invariance of
a dataset and the calibration error induced in the downstream reward model.

5We use all-MiniLM-L6-v2 from Sentence Transformer to generate embeddings. We investigated a suite of

different sentence embeddings and found them to be highly correlated.

6

0.000.250.500.751.00Similarity0.00.10.20.3FrequencyHigh informationHH-RLHF0.250.000.250.500.751.00SimilarityHigh informationUltraFeedbackCosine Similarity Between Responses for Different Datasetsopt350mTinyllama1BLlama7BModel0.640.660.680.70AccuracyHH-RLHFInfoHighNormalopt350mTinyllama1BLlama7BModel0.720.740.760.780.80AccuracyUltraFeedbackInfoHighNormalPerformance with High Information vs Random Training ExamplesLastly, we find that preference datasets vary widely in the distribution of similarity of response
pairs. The performance improvements of training from high information or dissimilar response pairs
depends on the underlying reward model. An extreme case is if the underlying language model has
undergone RLHF policy learning using a preference dataset, then the relative value or information of
this dataset should be lower for reward modeling. Recent work has proposed that learning policies
from on-policy data outperforms methods using out-of-distribution data [38]. Future work should
define and investigate on-policy data for reward model learning in the context of RLHF.