---
paper_id: 2405.21060
source: arxiv
title: Transformers are SSMs: Mamba-2
converted_at: 2026-05-12T00:57:10.618570
note: "Content extracted before References section"
---

4
2
0
2

y
a
M
1
3

]

G
L
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
6
0
1
2
.
5
0
4
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Transformers are SSMs: Generalized Models and Efficient Algorithms
Through Structured State Space Duality

Tri DaoвҲ—1 and Albert GuвҲ—2

1Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
2Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
anonymous@anonymous.org, anonymous@anonymous.org

Abstract

While Transformers have been the main architecture behind deep learningвҖҷs success in language modeling, state-space
models (SSMs) such as Mamba have recently been shown to match or outperform Transformers at small to medium scale.
We show that these families of models are actually quite closely related, and develop a rich framework of theoretical
connections between SSMs and variants of attention, connected through various decompositions of a well-studied class
of structured semiseparable matrices. Our state space duality (SSD) framework allows us to design a new architecture
(Mamba-2) whose core layer is an a refinement of MambaвҖҷs selective SSM that is 2-8Г— faster, while continuing to be
competitive with Transformers on language modeling.

1 Introduction

Transformers, in particular decoder-only models (e.g. GPT (Brown et al. 2020), Llama (Touvron, Lavril, et al. 2023)) which
process input sequences in a causal fashion, are one of the main drivers of modern deep learningвҖҷs success. Numer-
ous approaches attempt to approximate the core attention layer to address its efficiency issues (Tay et al. 2022), such as
scaling quadratically in sequence length during training and requiring a cache of size linear in sequence length during
autoregressive generation. In parallel, a class of alternative sequence models, structured state-space models (SSMs), have
emerged with linear scaling in sequence length during training and constant state size during generation. They show
strong performance on long-range tasks (e.g. S4 (Gu, Goel, and RГ© 2022)) and recently matched or beat Transformers on
language modeling (e.g. Mamba (Gu and Dao 2023)) at small to moderate scale. However, the development of SSMs have
appeared disjoint from the communityвҖҷs collective effort to improve Transformers, such as understanding them theoreti-
cally as well as optimizing them on modern hardware. As a result, it is more difficult to understand and experiment with
SSMs compared to Transformers, and it remains challenging to train SSMs as efficiently as Transformers from both an
algorithmic and systems perspective.

Our main goal is to develop a rich body of theoretical connections between structured SSMs and variants of attention. This
will allow us to transfer algorithmic and systems optimizations originally developed for Transformers to SSMs, towards
the goal of building foundation models that perform better than Transformers while scaling more efficiently in sequence
length. A milestone contribution in this direction was the Linear Attention (LA) framework (Katharopoulos et al. 2020),
which derived a connection between autoregressive attention and linear RNNs by showing the equivalence between вҖңdual
formsвҖқ of quadratic kernelized attention and a particular linear recurrence. This duality allows new capabilities such as
In the same spirit, this
the ability to have both efficient parallelizable training and efficient autoregressive inference.
paper provides multiple viewpoints connecting linear-complexity SSMs with quadratic-complexity forms to combine the
strengths of SSMs and attention.1

вҲ—Alphabetical by last name.
1Technically speaking, these connections only relate to certain flavors of attention; the title of this paper is an homage to Katharopoulos et al. (2020)

which first showed that вҖңTransformers are RNNsвҖқ.

1

State Space Duality. Our framework connecting struc-
tured SSMs and variants of attention, which we call struc-
tured state space duality (SSD),
is made through the
abstractions of structured matrices: matrices with sub-
quadratic parameters and multiplication complexity. We de-
velop two broad frameworks for representing sequence mod-
els, one as matrix transformations and one as tensor contrac-
tions, which each reveal different perspectives of the duality.
Our technical contributions include:

вҖў We show an equivalence between state space models and a
well-studied family of structured matrices called semisep-
arable matrices (Section 3). This connection is at the
heart our framework, revealing new properties and algo-
rithms for SSMs. A central message of this paper is that
different methods of computing state space models can be re-
framed as various matrix multiplication algorithms on struc-
tured matrices.

вҖў We significantly improve the theory of

linear atten-
tion (Katharopoulos et al. 2020). We first provide an in-
cisive proof of its recurrent form through the language of
tensor contractions, and then generalize it to a new family
of structured masked attention (SMA) (Section 4).
вҖў We connect SSMs and SMA, showing that they have a large
intersection that are duals of each other, possessing both
SSM-like linear and attention-like quadratic forms (Sec-
tion 5). We also prove that any kernel attention method
possessing a fast recurrent form must be an SSM.

Figure 1: (Structured State-Space Duality.) This paper
fleshes out the relationship between state space models
and attention through the bridge of structured matrices.

Beyond its intrinsic theoretical value, our framework opens up a broad set of directions for understanding and improving
sequence models.

First and most importantly, our framework exposes new efficient and easily-implementable algo-
Efficient Algorithms.
rithms for computing SSMs (Section 6). We introduce a new SSD algorithm, based on block decompositions of semisepa-
rable matrices, that takes advantage of both the linear SSM recurrence and quadratic dual form, obtaining optimal tradeoffs
on all main efficiency axes (e.g. training and inference compute, memory usage, and ability to leverage matrix multipli-
cation units on modern hardware). A dedicated implementation of SSD is 2 вҲ’ 8Г— faster than the optimized selective scan
implementation of Mamba, while simultaneously allowing for much larger recurrent state sizes (8Г— the size of Mamba or
even higher, with minimal slowdown). SSD is highly competitive with optimized implementations of softmax attention
(FlashAttention-2 (Dao 2024)), crossing over at sequence length 2K and 6Г— faster at sequence length 16K.

Architecture Design. One major obstacle to adopting new architectures such as SSMs is the ecosystem tailored to
Transformers, such as hardware-efficient optimization and parallelism techniques for large-scale training. Our framework
allows using established conventions and techniques for attention to build a vocabulary of architecture design choices for
SSMs, and further improve them (Section 7). For example, we introduce the analog of heads from multi-head attention
(MHA) to SSMs. We show that the Mamba architecture is a multi-input SSM (MIS) that turns out to be analogous to
multi-value attention (MVA), and compare other variants of Mamba with different head structures.
We also use these ideas to make slight modifications to the Mamba block, which allows tensor parallelism to be imple-
mented (e.g. in the style of Megatron (Shoeybi et al. 2019)). The main ideas include introducing grouped-value attention
(GVA) head structure, and moving all data-dependent projections to occur in parallel at the beginning of the block.

The combination of the modified parallel Mamba block, together with using SSD as the inner SSM layer, results in the
Mamba-2 architecture. We investigate Chinchilla scaling laws for Mamba-2 in the same setting as Mamba, finding that
it Pareto dominates Mamba and Transformer++ in both perplexity and wall-clock time. We additionally train a family of

2

Efficient AlgorithmsState Space Models (SSM)AttentionState Space Duality (SSD)Structured Masked Attention (SMA)Semiseparable MatricesSec. 5Sec. 4Sec. 3Structured MatricesSec. 6Mamba-2Sec. 7Mamba-2 models at varying sizes on the Pile, showing that it matches or outperforms Mamba and open source Trans-
formers on standard downstream evaluations. For example, Mamba-2 with 2.7B parameters trained on 300B tokens on
the Pile outperforms Mamba-2.8B, Pythia-2.8B and even Pythia-6.9B trained on the same dataset.

Systems Optimizations. The SSD framework connects SSMs and Transformers, allowing us to leverage a rich body of
work on systems optimizations developed for Transformers (Section 8).

вҖў For example, Tensor Parallelism (TP) is an important model parallelism technique to train large Transformer models
by splitting each layer across GPUs on the same node. We design Mamba-2 to be TP-friendly, reducing the number of
synchronization point per block by half.

вҖў For very long sequences whose activations do not fit on one device, sequence parallelism has been developed for the
attention blocks. We describe how to train SSMs in general and Mamba-2 in particular with sequence parallelism, by
passing the recurrent states between devices.

вҖў For finetuning with examples of different lengths, for best efficiency, Transformer requires sophisticated techniques to
remove padding tokens and perform attention on variable length sequences. We show how Mamba-2 can be trained
with variable sequence lengths efficiently, requiring no padding tokens.

Section 9 empirically validates Mamba-2 on language modeling, training efficiency, and a difficult multi-query associative
recall task (Arora, Eyuboglu, Zhang, et al. 2024). Finally, in Section 10, we provide an extended related work and discuss
potential research directions opened up by our framework.

Model code and pre-trained checkpoints are open-sourced at https://github.com/state-spaces/mamba.

2 Background and Overview

2.1 Structured State Space Models
Structured state space sequence models (S4) are a recent class of sequence models for deep learning that are broadly related
to RNNs, CNNs, and classical state space models. They are inspired by a particular continuous system (1) that maps a
1-dimensional sequence рқ‘Ҙ вҲҲ RT вҶҰвҶ’ рқ‘Ұ вҲҲ RT through an implicit latent state в„Һ вҲҲ R(T,N) .

A general discrete form of structured SSMs takes the form of equation (1).

в„Һрқ‘Ў = рқҗҙв„Һрқ‘Ў вҲ’1 + рқҗөрқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ў
рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ў = рқҗ¶вҠӨв„Һрқ‘Ў

(1a)

(1b)

в„Һрқ‘Ў = рқҗҙрқ‘Ўв„Һрқ‘Ў вҲ’1 + рқҗөрқ‘Ўрқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ў
рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ў = рқҗ¶вҠӨ
рқ‘Ў в„Һрқ‘Ў

(2a)

(2b)

where рқҗҙ вҲҲ R(N,N), рқҗө вҲҲ R(N,1), рқҗ¶ вҲҲ R(N,1) . Structured SSMs are so named because the рқҗҙ matrix controlling the temporal
dynamics must be structured in order to compute this sequence-to-sequence transformation efficiently enough to be used
in deep neural networks. The original structures introduced were diagonal plus low-rank (DPLR) (Gu, Goel, and RГ© 2022)
and diagonal (Gu, Gupta, et al. 2022; Gupta, Gu, and Berant 2022; J. T. Smith, Warrington, and Linderman 2023), which
remains the most popular structure.

In this work, we use the term state space model (SSM) to refer to structured SSMs. There are many flavors of such
SSMs, with deep ties to several major paradigms of neural sequence models such as continuous-time, recurrent, and
convolutional models (Gu, Johnson, Goel, et al. 2021). We provide a brief overview below, and refer to prior work for
more context and details (Gu 2023; Gu and Dao 2023).

Continuous-time Models. The original structured SSMs originated as continuous-time maps on functions рқ‘Ҙ (рқ‘Ў) вҲҲ R вҶҰвҶ’
рқ‘Ұ (рқ‘Ў) вҲҲ R, rather than operating directly on sequences. In the continuous-time perspective, in equation (1a) the matrices
(рқҗҙ, рқҗө) are not directly learned but generated from underlying parameters ( Лҡрқҗҙ, Лҡрқҗө), along with a parameterized step size О”.
The вҖңcontinuous parametersвҖқ (О”, Лҡрқҗҙ, Лҡрқҗө) are converted to вҖңdiscrete parametersвҖқ (рқҗҙ, рқҗө) through fixed formulas рқҗҙ = рқ‘“рқҗҙ (О”, Лҡрқҗҙ)
and рқҗө = рқ‘“рқҗө (О”, Лҡрқҗө), where the pair (рқ‘“рқҗҙ, рқ‘“рқҗө) is called a discretization rule.

Remark 1. While our main models adopt the same parameterization and discretization step as prior work (see Gu and Dao
(2023) for details), for simplifying exposition and notation we omit it in the rest of this paper. We note that prior work on

3

structured SSMs referred to the continuous parameters ( Лҡрқҗҙ, Лҡрқҗө) and discrete parameters (рқҗҙ, рқҗө) as (рқҗҙ, рқҗө) and ( ВҜрқҗҙ, ВҜрқҗө) instead; we
have changed notation to simplify the presentation and focus directly on the discrete parameters, which govern the main SSM
recurrence.

Recurrent Models. Equations (1) and (2) take the form of a recurrence which is linear in its input рқ‘Ҙ. Structured SSMs
can therefore be viewed as types of recurrent neural networks (RNNs), where the linearity endows them with additional
properties and allows them to avoid the sequential computation of traditional RNNs. Conversely, despite this simplifi-
cation, SSMs are still fully expressive as sequence transformations (in the sense of universal approximation) (Kaul 2020;
Orvieto et al. 2023; Shida Wang and Xue 2023).

Convolutional Models. When the SSMвҖҷs dynamics are constant through time as in equation (1), the model is called
linear time-invariant (LTI). In this case, they are equivalent to convolutions. Thus, SSMs can also be viewed as types
of CNNs, but where (i) the convolution kernels are implicitly parameterized through the SSM parameters (рқҗҙ, рқҗө, рқҗ¶) and (ii)
the convolution kernels are generally global instead of local. Conversely, through classical signal processing theory all
sufficiently well-behaved convolutions can be represented as SSMs.

Commonly, previous LTI SSMs would use the convolutional mode for efficient parallelizable training (where the whole
input sequence is seen ahead of time), and switched into recurrent mode (1) for efficient autoregressive inference (where
the inputs are seen one step at a time).

Selective State Space Models. The form (2) where the parameters (рқҗҙ, рқҗө, рқҗ¶) can also vary in time was introduced in
Mamba as the selective SSM. Compared to the standard LTI formulation (1), this model can selectively choose to focus
on or ignore inputs at every timestep. It was shown to perform much better than LTI SSMs on information-dense data
such as language, especially as its state size N increases allowing for more information capacity. However, it can only
be computed in recurrent instead of convolutional mode, and requires a careful hardware-aware implementation to be
efficient. Even so, it is still less efficient than hardware-friendly models such as CNNs and Transformers because it does
not leverage matrix multiplication units, which modern accelerators such as GPUs and TPUs are specialized for.

While time-invariant SSMs are closely related to continuous, recurrent, and convolutional sequence models, they are not
directly related to attention. In this paper, we show a deeper relationship between selective SSMs and attention, and use
it to significantly improve the training speed of SSMs while simultaneously allowing for much larger state sizes N.

Structured SSMs as Sequence Transformations.
Definition 2.1. We use the term sequence transformation to refer to a parameterized map on sequences рқ‘Ң = рқ‘“рқңғ (рқ‘Ӣ ) where
рқ‘Ӣ, рқ‘Ң вҲҲ R(T,P) and рқңғ is an arbitrary collection of parameters. T represents the sequence or time axis; subscripts index into the
first dimension, e.g. рқ‘Ӣрқ‘Ў, рқ‘Ңрқ‘Ў вҲҲ RP.
Sequence transformations (e.g. SSMs, or self-attention) are the cornerstone of deep sequence models, where they are
incorporated into neural network architectures (e.g. Transformers). The SSM in (1) or (2) is a sequence transformation
with P = 1; it can be generalized to P > 1 by simply broadcasting across this dimension (in other words, viewing the input
as P independent sequences and applying the SSM to each). One can think of P as a head dimension, which we will
elaborate on in Section 7.

Definition 2.2. We define the SSM operator SSM(рқҗҙ, рқҗө, рқҗ¶) = SSM(рқҗҙ0:рқ‘Ү , рқҗө0:рқ‘Ү , рқҗ¶0:рқ‘Ү ) as the sequence transformation рқ‘Ӣ вҲҲ
R(T,P) вҶҰвҶ’ рқ‘Ң вҲҲ R(T,P) defined by equation (2).
In SSMs, the N dimension is a free parameter called the state size or state dimension. We also call it the state expansion
factor, because it expands the size of the input/output by a factor of рқ‘Ғ , with implications for the computational efficiency
of these models.

Finally, we remark that many types of sequence transformations, such as attention, can be represented as a single matrix
multiplication across the sequence dimension.

Definition 2.3. We call a sequence transformation рқ‘Ң = рқ‘“рқңғ (рқ‘Ӣ ) a matrix transformation if it can be written in the form
рқ‘Ң = рқ‘Җрқңғрқ‘Ӣ where рқ‘Җ is a matrix depending on the parameters рқңғ . We identify the sequence transformation with the matrix рқ‘Җ,
and often drop the dependence on рқңғ when clear from context.

4

2.2 Attention
Attention broadly refers to a type of computation that assigns scores to every pair of positions in a sequence, allowing
each element to вҖңattendвҖқ to the rest. By far the most common and important variant of attention is softmax self-attention,
which can be defined as

рқ‘Ң = softmax(рқ‘„рқҗҫ вҠӨ) В· рқ‘ү

for рқ‘„, рқҗҫ, рқ‘ү вҲҲ R(T,P) . The mechanism of pairwise comparisons (induced by materializing рқ‘„рқҗҫ вҠӨ) leads to the characteristic
quadratic training cost of attention.

Many variants of attention have been proposed, but all share the underlying core of these attention scores, with various
approximations (Tay et al. 2022). The most important variant for this work is linear attention (Katharopoulos et al. 2020).
Roughly speaking, this family of methods drops the softmax by folding it into a kernel feature map, and uses associativity
of matrix multiplication to rewrite (рқ‘„рқҗҫ вҠӨ) В· рқ‘ү = рқ‘„ В· (рқҗҫ вҠӨрқ‘ү ). Moreover, in the important case of causal (autoregressive)
attention, they show that when the causal mask is incorporated into the left-hand side as (рқҗҝ в—Ұ рқ‘„рқҗҫ вҠӨ) В· рқ‘ү , where рқҗҝ is the
lower-triangular 1вҖҷs matrix, then the right-hand side can be expanded as a recurrence. Several recent and concurrent works
such as RetNet (Y. Sun et al. 2023) and GateLoop (Katsch 2023) strengthen this to more general forms of рқҗҝ (Section 10). In
this work, our formulation of structured masked attention will strongly generalize these ideas.

2.3 Structured Matrices
General matrices рқ‘Җ вҲҲ R(T,T) require T2 parameters to represent and рқ‘Ӯ (T2) time to perform basic operations such as
matrix-vector multiplication. Structured matrices are those that

(i) can be represented in subquadratic (ideally linear) parameters through a compressed representation, and

(ii) have fast algorithms (most importantly matrix multiplication) by operating directly on this compressed represen-

tation.

Perhaps the most canonical families of structured matrices are sparse and low-rank matrices. However, there exist many
other families, such as Toeplitz, Cauchy, Vandermonde, and butterfly matrices, which have all been used in machine
learning for efficient models (Dao, Gu, et al. 2019; D. Fu et al. 2024; Gu, Gupta, et al. 2022; Thomas et al. 2018). Structured
matrices are a powerful abstraction for efficient representations and algorithms. In this work, we will show that SSMs
are equivalent to another class of structured matrices that have not previously been used in deep learning, and use this
connection to derive efficient methods and algorithms.

2.4 Overview: Structured State Space Duality
While this paper develops a much richer framework of connections between SSMs, attention, and structured matrices, we
provide a brief summary of the main method, which is actually quite self-contained and simple algorithmically.

Recurrent (Linear) Form. The state space dual (SSD) layer can be defined as a special case of the selective SSM (2).
The standard computation of an SSM as a recurrence (or parallel scan) can be applied, which has linear complexity in
sequence length. Compared to the version used in Mamba, SSD has two minor differences:

вҖў The structure on рқҗҙ is further simplified from diagonal to scalar times identity structure. Each рқҗҙрқ‘Ў can also be identified

with just a scalar in this case.

вҖў We use a larger head dimension P, compared to P = 1 used in Mamba. Typically P = {64, 128} is chosen which is

similar to conventions for modern Transformers.

Compared to the original selective SSM, these changes can be viewed as slightly decreasing the expressive power in
return for significant training efficiency improvements. In particular, our new algorithms will allow the use of matrix
multiplication units on modern accelerators.

5

Dual (Quadratic) Form. The dual form of SSD is a quadratic computation closely related to attention, defined as

(рқҗҝ в—Ұ рқ‘„рқҗҫ вҠӨ) В· рқ‘ү

рқҗҝрқ‘– рқ‘— =

(cid:40)рқ‘Һрқ‘– Г— В· В· В· Г— рқ‘Һ рқ‘—+1
0

рқ‘– вүҘ рқ‘—
рқ‘– < рқ‘—

where рқ‘Һрқ‘– are input-dependent scalars bounded in [0, 1].

Compared to standard softmax attention, there are two main differences

вҖў The softmax is dropped.

вҖў The attention matrix is multiplied elementwise-wise by an additional mask matrix рқҗҝ.

Both of these changes can be viewed as addressing problems in vanilla attention. For example, the softmax has been
recently observed to cause problems in attention scores, such as the вҖңattention sinkвҖқ phenomenon (Darcet et al. 2024;
Xiao et al. 2024). More importantly, the mask matrix рқҗҝ can be viewed as replacing the heuristic positional embeddings
of Transformers with a different data-dependent positional mask that controls how much information is transfered across
time.

More broadly, this form is an instance of our structured masked attention generalization of linear attention, defined in
Section 4.

Matrix Form and SSD Algorithm. The various forms of SSD are connected through a unified matrix representation,
by showing that SSMs have a matrix transformation form рқ‘Ң = рқ‘Җрқ‘Ӣ for a matrix рқ‘Җрқңғ вҲҲ R(T,T) that depends on рқңғ = (рқҗҙ, рқҗө, рқҗ¶).
In particular, the dual form of SSD is equivalent to naive (quadratic-time) multiplication by the matrix рқ‘Җ, and the recurrent
form is a particular efficient (linear-time) algorithm that leverages the structure in рқ‘Җ.

Going beyond these, any algorithm for multiplication by рқ‘Җ can be applied. Our proposed hardware-efficient SSD algo-
rithm (Section 6) is a new structured matrix multiplication method that involves block decompositions of рқ‘Җ, which obtains
better efficiency tradeoffs than either the pure linear or quadratic forms. It is relatively simple and easy-to-implement
compared to general selective SSMs (Gu and Dao 2023); Listing 1 provides a complete implementation in a few lines of
code.

Figure 1 provides a simple roadmap of the relationships between the concepts presented in this paper.

2.5 Notation
Throughout this paper, we prefer using precise notation that can be mapped to code.

Matrices and Vectors. We generally use lower case to denote vectors (i.e. tensors with a single axis) and upper case to
denote matrices (i.e. tensors with more than one axes). We do not bold matrices in this work. Sometimes, if a matrix is
tied or repeated along one axis (and hence can also be viewed as a vector), we may use either upper or lower case for it.2
В· denotes scalar or matrix multiplication while в—Ұ denotes Hadamard (elementwise) multiplication.

Indexing. We use Python-style indexing, e.g. рқ‘– : рқ‘— refers to the range (рқ‘–, рқ‘– + 1, . . . , рқ‘— вҲ’ 1) when рқ‘– < рқ‘— and (рқ‘–, рқ‘– вҲ’ 1, . . . , рқ‘— + 1)
when рқ‘– > рқ‘—. For example, for any symbol рқ‘Ј we let рқ‘Ј рқ‘—:рқ‘– for рқ‘— вүҘ рқ‘– denote the sequence (рқ‘Ј рқ‘—, . . . , рқ‘Јрқ‘–+1). [рқ‘–] is equivalent to
0 : рқ‘– = (0, . . . , рқ‘– вҲ’ 1). For shorthand, we also let рқ‘Ј Г—

рқ‘—:рқ‘– denote the product рқ‘Ј рқ‘— Г— В· В· В· Г— рқ‘Јрқ‘–+1.3

Dimensions. To distinguish from matrices and tensors, we often use capital letters in typewriter fonts (e.g. D, N, T) to
denote dimensions and tensor shapes. Instead of the traditional notation рқ‘Җ вҲҲ Rрқ‘Ү Г—рқ‘Ү we frequently use рқ‘Җ вҲҲ R(T,T) to
reflect tensor shapes in code.

Tensor Contractions. We will heavily rely on tensor contraction or einsum notation both for clarity and as a central
tool in stating and proving our results. We assume the reader to be familiar with this notation, which is commonly used

2In this work, this happens only with the рқҗҙ parameter of SSMs.
3In some contexts, it is always clear that the notation рқ‘Һрқ‘–:рқ‘— or рқҗҙрқ‘–:рқ‘— means рқ‘ҺГ—

рқ‘–:рқ‘— , and the superscript is omitted.

6

in modern tensor libraries such as numpy. For example, we can use contract(MN, NK вҶ’ MK) to denote the matrix-matrix
multiplication operator, and in our notation contract(MN, NK вҶ’ MK)(рқ‘Ӣ, рқ‘Ң ) (which is equivalent to рқ‘Ӣ В· рқ‘Ң ) can be translated
to code as numpy.einsum(вҖІmn, nk вҶ’ mkвҖІ, X, Y).

A large glossary of notation is included in Appendix A.

3 State Space Models are Structured Matrices

This section explores different perspectives of the state space model as a sequence transformation, and outlines properties
and algorithms of such maps. The main results of this section are about the equivalence between state space models
and a family of structured matrices called semiseparable matrices, which imply new efficiency results (Theorems 3.5
and 3.7).

3.1 The Matrix Transformation Form of State Space Models
Recall that our definition of an SSM is defined as a parameterized map defined through (2). Our theoretical framework
starts by simply writing this transformation as a matrix multiplication mapping the vectors рқ‘Ҙ вҲҲ RT вҶҰвҶ’ рқ‘Ұ вҲҲ RT.

By definition, в„Һ0 = рқҗө0рқ‘Ҙ0. By induction,

в„Һрқ‘Ў = рқҗҙрқ‘Ў . . . рқҗҙ1рқҗө0рқ‘Ҙ0 + рқҗҙрқ‘Ў . . . рқҗҙ2рқҗө1рқ‘Ҙ1 + В· В· В· + рқҗҙрқ‘Ўрқҗҙрқ‘Ў вҲ’1рқҗөрқ‘Ў вҲ’2рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ў вҲ’2 + рқҗҙрқ‘Ў рқҗөрқ‘Ў вҲ’1рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ў вҲ’1 + рқҗөрқ‘Ўрқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ў

=

рқ‘Ў
вҲ‘пёҒ

рқ‘ =0

рқҗҙГ—

рқ‘Ў :рқ‘ рқҗөрқ‘ рқ‘Ҙрқ‘  .

Multiplying by рқҗ¶рқ‘Ў to produce рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ў and vectorizing the equation over рқ‘Ў вҲҲ [T], we derive the matrix transformation form of
SSMs.

рқ‘Ў
вҲ‘пёҒ

рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ў =

рқ‘Ў рқҗҙГ—
рқҗ¶вҠӨ

рқ‘Ў :рқ‘ рқҗөрқ‘ рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ 

рқ‘ =0

рқ‘Ұ = SSM(рқҗҙ, рқҗө, рқҗ¶)(рқ‘Ҙ) = рқ‘Җрқ‘Ҙ
рқ‘— рқҗҙ рқ‘— В· В· В· рқҗҙрқ‘–+1рқҗөрқ‘–

рқ‘Җрқ‘—рқ‘– (cid:66) рқҗ¶вҠӨ

(3)

3.2 Semiseparable Matrices
рқ‘Җ in equation (3) is a particular representation of a class of matrices known as semiseparable matrices. Semiseparable
matrices are a fundamental matrix structure. We first define these matrices and their properties.

Definition 3.1. A (lower triangular) matrix рқ‘Җ is N-semiseparable if every submatrix contained in the lower triangular portion
(i.e. on or below the diagonal) has rank at most N. We call N the order or rank of the semiseparable matrix.
Definition 3.1, and other forms of related вҖңseparableвҖқ structure (e.g. quasiseparable matrices and other definitions of
semiseparable matrices) are sometimes called structured rank matrices (or rank-structured matrices) because they are
characterized by rank conditions on their submatrices. Semiseparable matrices have many structured representations
including the hierarchical semiseparable (HSS), sequential semiseparable (SSS), and Bruhat forms (Pernet and Storjohann
2018). We will primarily use the SSS form.

3.2.1 The Sequentially Semiseparable (SSS) Representation
Definition 3.2. A lower triangular matrix рқ‘Җ вҲҲ R(T,T) has a N-sequentially semiseparable (SSS) representation if it can
be written in the form

рқ‘Җрқ‘—рқ‘– = рқҗ¶вҠӨ

рқ‘— рқҗҙ рқ‘— В· В· В· рқҗҙрқ‘–+1рқҗөрқ‘–

(4)

for vectors рқҗө0, . . . , рқҗөTвҲ’1, рқҗ¶0, . . . , рқҗ¶TвҲ’1 вҲҲ RN and matrices рқҗҙ0, . . . , рқҗҙTвҲ’1 вҲҲ R(N,N) .
We define the operator SSS so that рқ‘Җ = SSS(рқҗҙ0:T, рқҗө0:T, рқҗ¶0:T).

7

A fundamental result of semiseparable matrices is that they are exactly equivalent to matrices with SSS representations.
One direction can be deduced with a simple constructive proof.

Lemma 3.3. An N-SSS matrix рқ‘Җ with representation (4) is N-semiseparable.

Proof. Consider any off-diagonal block рқ‘Җрқ‘—:рқ‘— вҖІ,рқ‘–вҖІ:рқ‘– where рқ‘— вҖІ > рқ‘— вүҘ рқ‘– > рқ‘–вҖІ. This has an explicit rank-N factorization as

рқҗ¶вҠӨ

рқ‘— рқҗҙГ—
рқ‘—:рқ‘–вҖІрқҗөрқ‘–вҖІ
пЈ®
пЈҜ
...
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
рқ‘— вҖІ вҲ’1:рқ‘–вҖІрқҗөрқ‘–вҖІ
рқ‘— вҖІ вҲ’1рқҗҙГ—
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
пЈҜ
пЈ°

. . .

рқҗ¶вҠӨ

рқ‘— рқҗҙГ—

. . . рқҗ¶вҠӨ

рқ‘— вҖІ вҲ’1рқҗҙГ—

рқ‘—:рқ‘– вҲ’1рқҗөрқ‘– вҲ’1
...
рқ‘— вҖІ вҲ’1:рқ‘– вҲ’1рқҗөрқ‘– вҲ’1

=

пЈ№
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈ»

рқҗ¶вҠӨ

рқ‘— рқҗҙГ—
пЈ®
рқ‘—:рқ‘—
пЈҜ
...
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
рқ‘— вҖІ вҲ’1рқҗҙГ—
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
пЈҜ
пЈ°

рқ‘— вҖІ вҲ’1:рқ‘—

рқҗҙГ—

рқ‘—:рқ‘– вҲ’1

(cid:2)рқҗҙГ—

рқ‘– вҲ’1:рқ‘–вҖІрқҗөрқ‘–вҖІ

В· В· В· рқҗҙГ—

рқ‘– вҲ’1:рқ‘– вҲ’1рқҗөрқ‘– вҲ’1(cid:3) .

пЈ№
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈ»

(5)

в–Ў

Equation (5) will be used extensively in deriving our fast algorithms for sequence models. The other direction is well-
established in the literature on semiseparable matrices.

Proposition 3.4. Every N-semiseparable matrix has a N-SSS representation.
Furthermore, note that although Definition 3.2 involves рқ‘Ӯ (N2T) parameters for the representation (in particular to store the
рқҗҙ matrices), it can actually be compressed down to рқ‘Ӯ (NT) parameters, which is asymptotically tight (Pernet, Signargout,
and Villard 2023). Therefore in the rest of this paper we will conflate the structured matrix class (Definition 3.1) and a
particular representation of it (Definition 3.2); we will always use this representation instead of other candidates. In turn
we will use N-SS to refer to an N-semiseparable matrix in SSS form.

Semiseparable matrices are a fundamental matrix structure and have many important properties. They are deeply related
to recurrences at large, and can be defined by multiple characterizations (e.g. Definitions 3.1 and 3.2) which reveal different
connections and efficient algorithms for them. We mention some of their other properties in Appendix C.1.

Remark 2. The notion of semiseparability is very broad and many similar but subtlely different definitions appear in the
literature; our definitions may differ slightly from other conventions. First, because we are primarily concerned with causal or
autoregressive settings in this paper, we have restricted the definition of semiseparability to the triangular case; Definition 3.1
more formally might be called (N, 0)-semiseparability by some authors. Some authors may also instead refer to it as a form of
quasiseparability (Eidelman and Gohberg 1999; Pernet 2016). See Vandebril et al. (2005) for a brief survey.

3.2.2 1-Semiseparable Matrices: the Scalar SSM Recurrence

We will single out the special case of 1-SS matrices. Note that in this case, the рқҗ¶ рқ‘— and рқҗөрқ‘– are scalars, and can be factored
out of the SSS representation (4) (we also use lower-case to emphasize that the parameters are scalars in this case)

SSS(рқ‘Һ, рқ‘Ҹ, рқ‘җ) = diag(рқ‘җ) В· рқ‘Җ В· diag(рқ‘Ҹ)

where

рқ‘Җрқ‘—рқ‘– = рқ‘ҺГ—
рқ‘—:рқ‘– .

Since diagonal matrices are easy to handle (e.g. multiplication by a diagonal matrix is the same as elementwise scalar
multiplication), we can ignore these terms. Thus our basic representation of a 1-SS matrix is рқ‘Җрқ‘—рқ‘– = рқ‘Һ рқ‘—:рқ‘– or

рқ‘Җ = 1SS(рқ‘Һ0:рқ‘Ү ) (cid:66)

1
пЈ®
пЈҜ
рқ‘Һ1
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
рқ‘Һ2рқ‘Һ1
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
...
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
рқ‘Һрқ‘Ү вҲ’1 . . . рқ‘Һ1
пЈҜ
пЈ°

1
рқ‘Һ2
...
рқ‘Һрқ‘Ү вҲ’1 . . . рқ‘Һ2

1
. . .
. . .

. . .
рқ‘Һрқ‘Ү вҲ’1

.

пЈ№
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈ»

1

(6)

The importance of 1-SS matrices lies in their equivalence to the minimal form of a scalar recurrence вҖ“ the case of a
degenerate SSM with state dimension N = 1 and no (рқҗө, рқҗ¶) projections. Note that multiplication рқ‘Ұ = рқ‘Җрқ‘Ҙ can be computed
by the recurrence

рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ў = рқ‘Һрқ‘Ў :0рқ‘Ҙ0 + В· В· В· + рқ‘Һрқ‘Ў :рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ў

= рқ‘Һрқ‘Ў (рқ‘Һрқ‘Ў вҲ’1:0рқ‘Ҙ0 + В· В· В· + рқ‘Һрқ‘Ў вҲ’1:рқ‘Ў вҲ’1рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ў вҲ’1) + рқ‘Һрқ‘Ў :рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ў
= рқ‘Һрқ‘Ўрқ‘Ұрқ‘Ў вҲ’1 + рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ў .

8

(7)

Figure 2: (State Space Models are Semiseparable Matrices.) As sequence transformations, state space models can be
represented as a matrix transformation рқ‘Җ вҲҲ R(T,T) acting on the sequence dimension T, sharing the same matrix for each
channel in a head (Left). This matrix is a semiseparable matrix (Right), which is a rank-structured matrix where every
submatrix contained on-and-below the diagonal (Blue) has rank at most N, equal to the SSMвҖҷs state dimension.

We thus also refer to matrix multiplication by 1-SS matrices as the scalar SSM recurrence or the cumprodsum (cumu-
lative product sum; a generalization of cumulative product and cumulative sum) operator. As the fundamental form of
recurrence, multiplication by 1-SS matrices is important as a building block for our main algorithms.

We emphasize that one of the central themes of this paper is that many algorithms on sequence models can be reduced
to structured matrix multiplication algorithms. 1-SS matrices exemplify this connection: there are many fast algorithms
for computing the primitive scalar recurrence or cumprodsum operator, and all of them turn out to be equivalent to dif-
ferent structured factorization of 1-SS matrices. We dedicate Appendix B to these algorithms for 1-SS matrix multiplica-
tion.

3.3 State Space Models are Semiseparable Matrices
Recall that our definition of an SSM is defined as a parameterized map defined through Definition 2.1. The connection
between SSMs and semiseparable matrices follows from simply writing this transformation as a matrix multiplication
mapping the vectors рқ‘Ҙ вҶҰвҶ’ рқ‘Ұ вҲҲ RT.

Equation (3) directly establishes the link between state space models and the sequentially semiseparable representation,
which in turn are equivalent to semiseparable matrices in general (Lemma 3.3 and Proposition 3.4).

Theorem 3.5. The state space model transformation рқ‘Ұ = SSM(рқҗҙ, рқҗө, рқҗ¶)(рқ‘Ҙ) with state size N is identical to matrix multiplica-
tion by an N-SS matrix in sequentially semiseparable representation рқ‘Ұ = SSS(рқҗҙ, рқҗө, рқҗ¶) В· рқ‘Ҙ.
In other words the sequence transformation operator SSM (Definition 2.2) coincides with the matrix construction oper-
ator SSS (Definition 3.2), and we use them interchangeably (or sometimes SS as shorthand). FurthermoreвҖ”by a twist of
fateвҖ”structured state space models and sequentially semiseparable matrices have the same acronyms, underscoring their
equivalence! Conveniently we can use any of these acronyms SSM (state space model or semiseparable matrix), SSS (struc-
tured state space or sequentially semiseparable), or SS (state space or semiseparable) interchangeably to unambiguously
refer to either concept. However, we will generally use the convention that SSM refers to state space model, SS refers to
semiseparable, and SSS refers to sequentially semiseparable.

Figure 2 illustrates the sequence transformation perspective of state space models as semiseparable matrices.

9

InputsOutputsрқ‘Ӣрқ‘ҢHead dim.PSequencedim. TSequence Transformation Matrixрқ‘ҖState Space Models are Semiseparable Matrix TransformationsMatrix multiplication3.4 Computing State Space Models through Structured Matrix Algorithms
The reason Theorem 3.5 is important is that it will allow us to reduce the problem of efficient computation of SSMs (and
other sequence models) into efficient algorithms for structured matrix multiplication. We briefly provide an overview and
defer our main new algorithm to Section 6, after showing the equivalence of SSMs to other sequence models in Sections 4
and 5.

As previously defined, semiseparable matrices (i.e. rank-structured matrices) are a classical type of structured matrix:

(i) They have compressed representations such as the SSS form which has only рқ‘Ӯ (T) instead of рқ‘Ӯ (T2) parameters.

(ii) They have fast algorithms operating directly on the compressed representation.

Furthermore, the parameterization and matrix multiplication cost can be tight in the semiseparable order.

Proposition 3.6 (Pernet, Signargout, and Villard (2023)). An N-SS matrix of size T can be represented in рқ‘Ӯ (NT) parameters
and has matrix-vector multiplication in time and space рқ‘Ӯ (NT).
For example, 1-SS matrices illustrate the essence of this connection. The matrix рқ‘Җ = 1SS(рқ‘Һ) is defined by exactly T вҲ’ 1
parameters рқ‘Һ0:TвҲ’1 = рқ‘Һ1, . . . , рқ‘ҺTвҲ’1, and can be computed in рқ‘Ӯ (T) time by following the scalar recurrence (7).

3.4.1 The Linear (Recurrent) Mode

Proposition 3.6 can be easily seen in the case of diagonal structured SSMs (S4D (Gu, Gupta, et al. 2022)), simply by
leveraging the state space model formulation (2) and unrolling the recurrence. We provide the formal tensor-contraction
algorithm in (8), where the dimension S is equal to T4.

рқ‘Қ = contract(SP, SN вҶ’ SPN)(рқ‘Ӣ, рқҗө)
рқҗ» = contract(TSN, SPN вҶ’ TPN)(рқҗҝ, рқ‘Қ )
рқ‘Ң = contract(TN, TPN вҶ’ TP)(рқҗ¶, рқҗ» )

(S, P, N)
(T, P, N)
(T, P)

(8a)

(8b)

(8c)

Here, рқҗҝ вҲҲ R(T,T) is defined as 1SS(рқҗҙ), or in other words рқҗҝ0:T,0:T = 1SS(рқҗҙ0:T) for рқ‘– вҲҲ [N]. This algorithm involves three steps
corresponding to (2):

(i) expanding the input рқ‘Ӣ by the input matrix рқҗө (8a),
(ii) unrolling independent scalar SSM recurrences (8b), and

(iii) contracting the hidden state рқҗ» by the output matrix рқҗ¶ (8c).
Note that we have used the equivalence between scalar SSMs and 1-SS matrices in step (8b).

Remark 3. We note that (8) is a special case of the Mamba (S6) model. however, a naive implementation is slow because
of the expanded tensors рқ‘Қ and рқҗ» of size (T, P, N); Gu and Dao (2023) introduced a hardware-aware implementation to avoid
materializing these tensors.

Surprisingly, Theorem 3.5 and Proposition 3.6 immediately imply that all SSMs have the same asymptotic efficiency as
algorithm (8).

Theorem 3.7. Any state space model (Definition 2.2) of state size N on sequence length T can be computed in time рқ‘Ӯ (TN) (not
accounting for potential preprocessing).
We note that this result is new to the structured SSM literature. In particular, given dense unstructured рқҗҙрқ‘Ў matrices, the
total representation alone seems to be of size рқ‘Ӯ (TN2). Thus Theorem 3.7 states the non-trivial result that with a pre-
processing step, even an unstructured SSM can be computed optimally efficiently, with upper bound matching the lower
bound рқ‘Ӯ (TN) given by the size of рқҗө and рқҗ¶.
Remark 4. Theorem 3.7 is perhaps not too surprising in light of the fact that almost all dense matrices over R(N,N) are
diagonalizable over C, leading to the result that almost all dense real SSMs are equivalent to a diagonal complex SSM. This
fact underlies the reason why diagonal SSMs are the most popular form of structured SSM (Gu, Gupta, et al. 2022; Gupta, Gu,

4A different symbol is required for the contraction notation.

10

and Berant 2022; J. T. Smith, Warrington, and Linderman 2023). However, Theorem 3.7 implies the much stronger result for
all real SSMs (not just the diagonalizable ones), as well as dense SSMs over other fields (including C itself).
In practice, efficiently computable SSMs still require additional structure on рқҗҙ, particularly to avoid the expensive pre-
processing step (which both has order N extra FLOPs and involves hardware-inefficient operations such as singular value
decompositions). These structures are the focus of past work on structured SSMs (e.g. S4(D) and Mamba) as well as our
new algorithms. In particular, when slightly stronger structure is imposed on рқҗҙ, we will design very hardware-efficient
algorithms through block decompositions of the SSM matrix рқ‘Җ = SSS(рқҗҙ, рқҗө, рқҗ¶) in Section 6.

3.4.2 The Quadratic (Naive) Mode

We note that there is another way to compute an SSM exposed by our new matrix point of view. A naive computation of
the matrix SSM representation (3) involves simply materializing the sequence transformation matrix рқ‘Җ = SSS(рқҗҙ, рқҗө, рқҗ¶).
This is a (T, T) matrix, and therefore this naive algorithm will scale quadratically in sequence length. However, when the
sequence length T is short, this can actually be more efficient than the linear algorithm due to constant factors and the
hardware-friendliness of the computation pattern (e.g. leveraging matrix-matrix multiplications). In fact, for a particular
case of structured SSMs, this looks very similar to a quadratic attention computation (Section 5).

3.4.3 Summary

Many sequence models are explicitly motivated or defined as matrix sequence transformations вҖ“ most notably Trans-
formers, where the matrix mixer is the attention matrix. On the other hand, RNNs and SSMs have not previously been
described in this way. By providing an explicit matrix transformation form of state space models, we reveal new ways of
understanding and using them. From a computational perspective, any method of computing the forward pass of a state
space model can be viewed as a matrix multiplication algorithm on semiseparable matrices. The semiseparable matrix
perspective provides one lens into state space duality (SSD), where the dual modes respectively refer to a linear-time
semiseparable matrix multiplication algorithm and quadratic-time naive matrix multiplication.

Moreover, leveraging the rich structure of semiseparable matrices can lead to even better algorithms and more insights (e.g.
Section 6 and Appendix B). In Appendix C.1, we describe some additional properties of semiseparable matrices.

4 Structured Masked Attention: Generalizing Linear Attention

with Structured Matrices

In this section we revisit the linear attention framework from first principles. The main results in this section are a simple
tensor-contraction-based proof of linear attention (Proposition 4.1), and our generalized abstraction of structured masked
attention in Definition 4.2. We note that this section derives the main duality results from a different direction than state
space models and can be read completely independently of Section 3.

вҖў Section 4.1 sets up our framework for variants of attention, with a particular focus on kernel attention and masked

kernel attention.

вҖў Section 4.2 provides our first main attention result, a simple proof of linear attention through the lens of tensor

contractions.

вҖў Section 4.3 defines structured masked attention, our generalization of prior attention variants through structured

matrices.

11

4.1 The Attention Framework

4.1.1 Attention

The basic form of (single-head) attention is a map on three sequences of vectors (рқ‘„, рқҗҫ, рқ‘ү ) вҶҰвҶ’ рқ‘Ң .

рқ‘„ = input
рқҗҫ = input
рқ‘ү = input
рқҗә = рқ‘„рқҗҫ вҠӨ
рқ‘Җ = рқ‘“ (рқҗә)
рқ‘Ң = рқҗәрқ‘ү

(T, N)
(S, N)
(S, P)
(T, S)
(T, S)
(T, P)

(9)

We use вҖңshape annotationsвҖқ to indicate the dimensions of tensors, e.g. рқ‘„ вҲҲ R(T,N) . In this general form, S and T represent
source and target sequence lengths, N represents the feature dimension, and P represents the head dimension.
The most common variant of softmax attention uses a softmax activation рқ‘“ = softmax to normalize the rows of the рқҗә
matrix.

4.1.2 Self-Attention

Our treatment is motivated by the most important case of self-attention, where

(i) the source and target sequences are the same (i.e. S = T),

(ii) usually the feature and head dimensions are the same (i.e. N = P),

(iii) and рқ‘„, рқҗҫ, рқ‘ү are generated by linear projections on the same input vector (рқ‘„ = рқ‘Ҡрқ‘„ В· рқ‘Ӣ, рқҗҫ = рқ‘Ҡрқҗҫ В· рқ‘Ӣ, рқ‘ү = рқ‘Ҡрқ‘ү В· рқ‘Ӣ ).

However, our presentation abstracts away these choices and begins from the рқ‘„, рқҗҫ, рқ‘ү matrices.

Remark 5. Our focus is on the self-attention case with equal head and feature dimensions (i.e. S = T and N = P), which
should be used as the running example. We define the general formulation of attention not only so that our framework
captures variants such as cross-attention, but also because separating the notation for dimensions (e.g. S and T) makes the
contraction notation proofs of our main results in this section more clear.
Remark 6. While attention is usually framed as an operation on these three inputs рқ‘„, рқҗҫ, рқ‘ү which are viewed symmetrically,
the input and output dimensions in (9) indicate otherwise. In particular, the feature dimension N is not present in the output;
therefore in the case when S = T (e.g. self-attention), we view рқ‘ү as the main input, so that (9) defines a proper sequence
transformation рқ‘ү вҶҰвҶ’ рқ‘Ң (Definition 2.1).

4.1.3 Kernel Attention

The step where the softmax function is applied to the Gram matrix рқҗә can be decomposed into two parts:

1. Exponentiating the рқҗә matrix.

2. Normalizing the рқҗә matrix on the S axis.

We can ignore the normalization term for now, as it amounts to simply passing in рқ‘ү = 1 and dividing (we revisit this in
Section 7.3). The exponentiation term can be viewed as a kernel transformation: there is an (infinite-dimensional) feature
map рқң‘ such that exp(рқ‘„рқҗҫ вҠӨ) = рқң‘ (рқ‘„)рқң‘ (рқҗҫ)вҠӨ. By abstracting away the feature map into the definition of рқ‘„ and рқҗҫ itself
(i.e. define рқ‘„, рқҗҫ as the post-transformed versions), we can ignore the softmax transformation, and assume that рқ‘„, рқҗҫ are
arbitrarily generated by kernel feature maps and potentially N вү  P.

Many instantiations of kernel attention have been proposed, including:

вҖў The original Linear Attention (Katharopoulos et al. 2020) defines the kernel feature map as an arbitrary pointwise

activation function, such as рқ‘Ҙ вҶҰвҶ’ 1 + elu(рқ‘Ҙ).

вҖў Random Feature Attention (RFA) (H. Peng et al. 2021) chooses the kernel feature map to approximate softmax
attention (i.e. the exp feature map) using the random Fourier feature approximation of Gaussian kernels (Rahimi

12

and Recht 2007). This involves random projections (i.e. multiplying рқ‘„ and рқҗҫ by a random projection рқ‘Ҡ and applying
the activation рқ‘Ҙ вҶҰвҶ’ (cos(рқ‘Ҙ), sin(рқ‘Ҙ)).

вҖў Performer (Choromanski et al. 2021) proposes the fast attention via positive orthogonal random features (FAVOR+).
The positive random features (PRF) part chooses the kernel feature map to be a random projection followed by the
feature map рқ‘Ҙ вҶҰвҶ’ 2вҲ’1/2(exp(рқ‘Ҙ), exp(вҲ’рқ‘Ҙ)). This choice is motivated so that the kernel elements are positive-valued
and provably approximates the softmax attention. [It also proposes choosing the random projections in orthogonal
directions, which we do not consider.]

вҖў cosFormer (Qin, Weixuan Sun, et al. 2022) augment RFA with a cosine reweighting mechanism that incorpo-
rates positional information to emphasize locality. This effectively passes рқ‘„рқ‘Ў, рқҗҫрқ‘Ў through the feature map рқ‘Ҙ вҶҰвҶ’
(рқ‘Ҙ cos(рқңӢрқ‘Ў/2рқ‘Ү ), sin(рқңӢрқ‘Ў/2рқ‘Ү )).

вҖў Linear Randomized Attention (Zheng, C. Wang, and Kong 2022) generalize RFA from the perspective of impor-
tance sampling, and generalize it to provide better estimates of the full softmax kernel (rather than just the exp-
transformed numerator).

Other related attention variants include Linformer (Sinong Wang et al. 2020) and NystrГ¶former (Xiong et al. 2021), which
both use low-rank approximations of the attention matrix рқ‘Җ (and are thus compatible with equation (9)), through random
projections (Johnson-Lindenstrauss) and kernel approximation (the NystrГ¶m method) respectively.

4.1.4 Masked (Kernel) Attention
Let рқҗҝ be a mask of shape (T, S). Most commonly, in the autoregressive self-attention case when S = T, рқҗҝ may be a lower-
triangular matrix of 1вҖҷs representing a causal mask. Besides enforcing causality, many other types of masks can be applied
вҖ“ in particular various sparsity patterns such as banded, dilated, or block diagonal вҖ“ which are motivated by reducing the
complexity of dense attention.

Masked attention is usually written in matrix notation as

рқ‘Ұ = (рқҗҝ в—Ұ (рқ‘„рқҗҫ вҠӨ)) В· рқ‘ү .

More precisely, with shape annotations and breaking this down into the precise sequence of computations:

рқҗә = рқ‘„рқҗҫ вҠӨ
рқ‘Җ = рқҗә в—Ұ рқҗҝ
рқ‘Ң = рқ‘Җрқ‘ү

(T, S)
(T, S)
(T, P)

(10)

(11)

Our improved derivation of attention variants in this section starts by noticing that this formula can be written as a single
contraction:

рқ‘Ң = contract(TN, SN, SP, TS вҶ’ TP)(рқ‘„, рқҗҫ, рқ‘ү , рқҗҝ)

(12)

and the algorithm in (11) can be reframed as computing (12) by a particular ordering of pairwise contractions

рқҗә = contract(TN, SN вҶ’ TS)(рқ‘„, рқҗҫ)
рқ‘Җ = contract(TS, TS вҶ’ TS)(рқҗә, рқҗҝ)
рқ‘Ң = contract(TS, SP вҶ’ TP)(рқ‘Җ, рқ‘ү )

(T, S)
(T, S)
(T, P)

(13a)

(13b)

(13c)

4.2 Linear Attention
Linear attention, and many other variants of efficient attention, is often motivated by changing the order of matrix as-
sociativity in the core attention computation (рқ‘„рқҗҫ вҠӨ)рқ‘ү = рқ‘„ (рқҗҫ вҠӨрқ‘ү ). However when the mask is added, the derivation is
somewhat less straightforward (for example, the original paper (Katharopoulos et al. 2020) and variants (Y. Sun et al. 2023)
state the formula without proof).

Roughly, the linear attention method claims that the following formula is equivalent to (10), which must be verified by
expanding the sum and tracking indices carefully.

рқ‘Ң = рқ‘„ В· cumsum(рқҗҫ вҠӨрқ‘ү )

(14)

13

Proposition 4.1 ((Katharopoulos et al. 2020)). Autoregressive kernel attention, i.e. masked kernel attention with the causal
mask, can be computed in рқ‘Ӯ (рқ‘Ү ) time by a recurrence taking constant time per step.

4.2.1 A Tensor Contraction Proof of Linear Attention

We present a simple and rigorous derivation of linear attention that will also immediately reveal how to generalize it. The
main idea is to perform the contraction (12) in an alternate order. We avoid ambiguous matrix notation and work directly
with contraction notation:

рқ‘Қ = contract(SP, SN вҶ’ SPN)(рқ‘ү , рқҗҫ)
рқҗ» = contract(TS, SPN вҶ’ TPN)(рқҗҝ, рқ‘Қ )
рқ‘Ң = contract(TN, TPN вҶ’ TP)(рқ‘„, рқҗ» )

(S, P, N)
(T, P, N)
(T, P)

(15a)

(15b)

(15c)

Intuitively, we interpret this contraction order as follows.

The first step (15a) performs an вҖңexpansionвҖқ into more features, by a factor of the feature dimension N. The third step
(15c) contracts the expanded feature dimension away. If рқҗҫ is viewed as the input (Remark 6), then рқ‘ү and рқ‘„ perform the
expansion and contraction, respectively.

The second step is the most critical, and explains the linear part of linear attention. First notice that (15b) is just a direct
matrix multiplication by рқҗҝ (since the (P, N) axes can be flattened). Also note that this is the only term that involves both
T and S axes, hence should have О©(TS) complexity (i.e. quadratic in sequence length). However, when the mask рқҗҝ is
the standard causal attention mask (lower triangular 1вҖҷs), matrix-vector multiplication by рқҗҝ is identical to a feature-wise
cumulative sum

рқ‘Ұ =

1
пЈ®
пЈҜ
...
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
1
пЈҜ
пЈ°

. . .
. . .

пЈ№
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
1
пЈә
пЈ»

рқ‘Ҙ вҮҗвҮ’

рқ‘Ұ0 = рқ‘Ҙ0
рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ў = рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ў вҲ’1 + рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ў

.

4.3 Structured Masked Attention
With the tensor contraction perspective of masked attention (15), we can immediately see that the crux of the original
linear attention is the fact that matrix-vector multiplication by the causal mask is equivalent to the cumulative sum opera-
tor.
However, we observe that there is no reason the attention mask has to be all 1вҖҷs. All that is necessary for linear attention
to be fast is for рқҗҝ to be a structured matrix, which by definition are those that have fast matrix multiplication (Section 2.3).
In particular, we can use any mask matrix рқҗҝ that has sub-quadratic (ideally linear) matrix-vector multiplication, which
would have the same complexity as standard linear attention by speeding up the bottleneck equation (15b).

Definition 4.2. Structured masked attention (SMA) (or structured attention for short) is defined as a function on
queries/keys/values рқ‘„, рқҗҫ, рқ‘ү as well as any structured matrix рқҗҝ (i.e. has sub-quadratic matrix multiplication), through the
4-way tensor contraction

рқ‘Ң = contract(TN, SN, SP, TS вҶ’ TP)(рқ‘„, рқҗҫ, рқ‘ү , рқҗҝ).

The SMA quadratic mode algorithm is the sequence of pairwise contractions defined by (13), which corresponds to the
standard (masked) attention computation.
The SMA linear mode algorithm is the sequence of pairwise contractions defined by (15), where step (15b) is optimized
through the subquadratic structured matrix multiplication.

We can instantiate structured masked attention to any given class of matrix structure. Some examples include (Fig-
ure 3):

вҖў Linear attention uses a causal mask.

вҖў RetNet (Y. Sun et al. 2023) uses a decay mask рқҗҝрқ‘– рқ‘— = рқӣҫрқ‘– вҲ’ рқ‘— В· I[ рқ‘— вүҘ рқ‘–] for some decay factor рқӣҫ вҲҲ [0, 1].

14

Figure 3: (Structured Masked Attention.) SMA constructs a masked attention matrix рқ‘Җ = рқ‘„рқҗҫ вҠӨ в—Ұ рқҗҝ for any structured
matrix рқҗҝ, which defines a matrix sequence transformation рқ‘Ң = рқ‘Җрқ‘ү . All instances of SMA have a dual subquadratic form
induced by a different contraction ordering, combined with the efficient structured matrix multiplication by рқҗҝ. Previous
examples include Linear Attention (Katharopoulos et al. 2020) and RetNet (Y. Sun et al. 2023). Beyond SSD (1-semiseparable
SMA), the focus of this paper, many other potential instantiations of structured attention are possible.

вҖў The decay mask could be generalized to a Toeplitz matrix рқҗҝрқ‘– рқ‘— = рқӣјрқ‘– вҲ’ рқ‘— for some learnable (or input-dependent) set of
parameters рқӣј вҲҲ RT. This can be interpreted as a form of relative positional encoding, reminiscent of other methods
such as AliBi (Press, N. Smith, and Lewis 2022) but multiplicative instead of additive.

вҖў Another variant could use a Fourier matrix рқҗҝрқ‘– рқ‘— = рқң”рқ‘– рқ‘—/T to encode positional structure a different way.

In Section 5, we consider semiseparable SMA, which defines our main SSD model.

4.3.1 Summary: The Dual Forms of Masked Attention

Standard (masked kernel) attention is often conflated between a function and an algorithm. Separating this distinction
presents a clear way to understand different variants of attention.

вҖў We view masked attention as a particular function (12).
вҖў The standard quadratic attention computation (13) can be viewed as an algorithm to compute the function.
вҖў Linear attention (15) is an alternate algorithm to compute the same function.

Moreover, in this case

вҖў The masked attention function is simply a particular contraction on four terms.
вҖў The quadratic and linear attention algorithms are simply two different orders to perform the contractions.

It is known that contraction orderings can make large differences in computation complexity, leading to the quadratic vs.
linear split. Just as state space models are a transformation that can be computed in multiple ways, with dual quadratic
vs. linear forms (Section 3.4), linear attention has a similar duality that results from two contraction orders. In fact, these
turn out to be different perspectives on the same underlying duality, which we make explicit in Section 5.

15

Causal MaskDecay Mask!"QueriesKeys1-semiseparableToeplitzDiscrete Fourier Transform=Linear AttentionRetentive Network1-SS Structured AttentionToeplitz Structured AttentionFourier Structured AttentionStructured Mask$Sequence Transformation Matrix%SSD5 State Space Duality

In Sections 3 and 4, we defined structured state space models and structured attention, discussed their properties, and
showed that they both have a quadratic algorithm and a linear algorithm. This section connects them together. Our main
result is showing that a particular case of structured state space models coincides with a particular case of structured
attention, and that the linear-time SSM algorithm and quadratic-time kernel attention algorithm are dual forms of each
other.

вҖў Section 5.1 specializes state space models to scalar structure, where the naive quadratic computation can be seen as

an instance of kernel attention.

вҖў Section 5.2 specializes structured masked attention to semiseparable SMA, which characterizes masked attention

with efficient autoregression.

вҖў Section 5.3 summarizes the connection between structured masked attention and structured state space models,

termed structured state space duality.

5.1 Scalar-Identity Structured State Space Models
In Section 3 we showed that state space models are equivalent to semiseparable matrix transformations, resulting in both
a linear recurrent form and quadratic naive form.

Recall that SSMs are defined by рқ‘Ұ = SSM(рқҗҙ, рқҗө, рқҗ¶)(рқ‘Ҙ), and the matrix form of SSMs uses the SSS (sequentially semisepara-
ble) representation рқ‘Җ = SSS(рқҗҙ, рқҗө, рқҗ¶) where рқ‘Җрқ‘—рқ‘– = рқҗ¶вҠӨ
Now let us consider the case where рқҗҙ рқ‘— is simply a scalar; in other words, an instantiation of a structured SSM where the
рқҗҙ matrices are extremely structured: рқҗҙ = рқ‘Һрқҗј for scalar рқ‘Һ and identity matrix рқҗј . Then we can rearrange

рқ‘— рқҗҙ рқ‘—:рқ‘–рқҗөрқ‘– (equation (3)).

And this can be vectorized into

рқ‘Җрқ‘—рқ‘– = рқҗҙ рқ‘—:рқ‘– В· (рқҗ¶вҠӨ

рқ‘— рқҗөрқ‘– ).

рқҗҝ (cid:66) 1SS(рқ‘Һ)
рқ‘Җ = рқҗҝ в—Ұ (рқҗ¶рқҗөвҠӨ)

where рқҗө, рқҗ¶ вҲҲ R(T,N) .

Using this formulation, the full output рқ‘Ң = рқ‘Җрқ‘Ӣ is computed precisely as

рқҗә = contract(TN, SN вҶ’ TS)(рқҗ¶, рқҗө)
рқ‘Җ = contract(TS, TS вҶ’ TS)(рқҗә, рқҗҝ)
рқ‘Ң = contract(TS, SP вҶ’ TP)(рқ‘Җ, рқ‘Ӣ )

(T, S)
(T, S)
(T, P)

(16)

where S = T. But this is exactly the same as original definition of masked kernel attention definition (13)!

Therefore, as alluded to in Section 3.4, naively computing the scalar structured SSMвҖ”by materializing the semiseparable
matrix рқ‘Җ and performing quadratic matrix-vector multiplicationвҖ”is exactly the same as quadratic masked kernel atten-
tion.

5.2 1-Semiseparable Structured Masked Attention
Structured masked attention allows for the use of any structured mask рқҗҝ. When рқҗҝ is the causal mask, it is standard linear
attention. Note that the causal mask is рқҗҝ = SS(1рқ‘Ү ), i.e. the 1-SS mask is generated by рқ‘Һрқ‘Ў = 1 in definition (6). This motivates
generalizing рқҗҝ to the class of 1-semiseparable masks, or 1-semiseparable structured masked attention (1-SS SMA),
where the cumsum in linear attentionвҖҷs recurrence is replaced by a more general recurrence вҖ“ the scalar SSM scan, i.e.
1-semiseparable matrix multiplication (Section 3.2.2).

Finally, the most important reason we consider 1-semiseparable SMA is because the linear form for computing it is a
special case of diagonal state space model. The linear form of SMA is algorithm (15), where the bottleneck step (15b)

16

can be viewed as matrix multiplication by the 1-SS mask. In Section 3, we also wrote out the computation for a diagonal
SSM (8), where the bottleneck step (8b) is a scalar SSM recurrence which is equivalent to 1-SS multiplication. The only
difference is that (8b) has an extra N dimension in рқҗҝ, because the matrix рқҗҙ is a diagonal matrix of size N. This N dimension
would disappear if all diagonal entries of рқҗҙ are the same, which results in Corollary 5.1.

Corollary 5.1. 1-SS SMA (masked attention with 1-semiseparable structured matrices рқҗҝ) (15) is a special case of a diagonal
SSM (8) where the diagonal matrix is a scalar multiple of the identity.
While Corollary 5.1 says that 1-SS SMA has an efficient recurrent form, we can also show a converse result that charac-
terizes which instances of SMA has efficient autoregression.

Theorem 5.2. For any instantiation of structured masked attention (Definition 4.2) that is an autoregressive process with
bounded order, the structured mask рқҗҝ must be a semiseparable matrix.
In other words, efficient autoregressive attention is general semiseparable SMA. Theorem 5.2 is proved in Appendix C.2.

Remark 7. While 1-semiseparable SMA is a special case of a state space model, general semiseparable SMA is strictly more
expressive than 1-SS SMA, and cannot be described by a standard SSM. However, the semiseparable multiplication by рқҗҝ and
the linear form of SMA (equation (15a)) each involve an expansion and contraction step, and can be absorbed into a similar
instance of 1-SS SMA with a single (larger) expansion.

In summary, 1-semiseparable structured attention is the most important case of SMA, because it is:

вҖў a natural generalization of linear attention with an input-dependent recurrence.

вҖў the simplest case of general semiseparable attention, which is equivalent to efficient autoregressive attention.

вҖў a special case of a diagonal state space model.

5.3 Structured State-Space Duality (SSD)
To summarize our results:

вҖў Structured state-space models (Section 3) are a model usually defined through a linear-time recurrence. However,
by expanding the matrix formulation characterizing its linear sequence-to-sequence transformation, one can derive
a quadratic form.

вҖў Attention variants (Section 4) are a model defined through quadratic-time pairwise interactions. However, by view-

ing it as a four-way tensor contraction and reducing in a different order, one can derive a linear form.

вҖў A natural special case of each one вҖ“ more precisely, state space models with scalar-identity structure on the рқҗҙ
matrices, and structured masked attention with 1-semiseparable structure on its рқҗҝ mask вҖ“ are duals of each other
with the exact same linear and quadratic forms.

Figure 4 summarizes the duality between these two representations.

An extended related work and discussion (Section 10) describes the relationship between SSD and general SSMs / attention
in more detail.

6 A Hardware-Efficient Algorithm for SSD Models

The benefits of developing the theoretical SSD framework between SSMs, attention, and structured matrices lies in using
the connections to improve the models and algorithms. In this section, we show how various algorithms for computing
SSD models efficiently can be derived from various algorithms for computing structured matrix multiplication.

Our main computational result is an algorithm for computing SSD models that combines both the linear (recurrent) mode
and quadratic (attention) mode. This algorithm is as computation efficient as SSMs (linear scaling in sequence length) and
as hardware-friendly as attention (primarily uses matrix multiplications).

Theorem 6.1. Consider an SSD model with state expansion factor N and head dimension P = N. There exists an algorithm
for computing the model on any input рқ‘Ӣ вҲҲ R(T,P) which only requires рқ‘Ӯ (TN2) training FLOPs, рқ‘Ӯ (TN) inference FLOPs, рқ‘Ӯ (N2)
inference memory, and whose work is dominated by matrix multiplications.

17

Structured State Space Model

Structured Masked Attention

рқҗ¶
рқҗө
рқ‘Ӣ
рқҗҙрқ‘—:рқ‘–
N

рқҗ»

(contraction matrix) рқ‘„
рқҗҫ
рқ‘ү
рқҗҝрқ‘—рқ‘–
N

(expansion matrix)
(input sequence)
(state matrix)
(state expansion dim.)

(queries)
(keys)
(values)
(mask)
(kernel feature dim.)

(hidden states (8b))
(linear mode)

= рқҗҝ В· рқ‘Ӣ рқҗө

SMA linear dual (15)

SSM quadratic dual (16)

рқҗә

(Gram matrix (13a))
= рқ‘„ В· рқҗҫ вҠӨ (quadratic mode)

Figure 4: (Structured State Space Duality.) State space duality describes the close relationship between state space
models and masked attention. (Left) General SSMs and SMA both possess linear and quadratic forms, with direct analogs
in notation. (Right) SSMs and SMA intersect at a large class of state space dual models (SSD) which capture many sequence
models as special cases.

Note that all of these bounds are tight, because a state space model with state expansion N operating on a head size of
N has total state size N2 (yielding the lower bounds for training and inference FLOPs of рқ‘Ӯ (TN2) and рқ‘Ӯ (N2) respectively).
Furthermore the input рқ‘Ӣ itself has TN elements, yielding the memory lower bound.

The main idea behind Theorem 6.1 is once again viewing the problem of computing a state space model as a semiseparable
matrix multiplication, but leveraging its structure in a new way. Instead of computing the whole matrix in either recurrent
or attention mode, we perform a block decomposition of the matrix. The diagonal blocks can be computed using the dual
attention mode, which can be efficiently done with matrix multiplications, while the off-diagonal blocks can be factored
by the rank-structure of semiseparable matrices and reduced to a smaller recurrence. We highlight that Listing 1 provides
a self-contained implementation of the SSD algorithm. Compared to the general selective SSM of Gu and Dao (2023),
this implementation is much simpler, and relatively efficient even in native PyTorch without requiring special low-level
kernels.

To begin, we partition the matrix рқ‘Җ into a T
off-diagonal blocks are low-rank by the defining property of semiseparable matrices (Definition 3.1).5

Q grid of submatrices of size Q Г— Q, for some block size Q. Note that the

Q Г— T

(Block Decomposition) рқ‘Җ =

рқ‘Җ (0,0)
рқ‘Җ (1,0)
...

пЈ®
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
рқ‘Җ (T/QвҲ’1,0) рқ‘Җ (T/QвҲ’1,1)
пЈҜ
пЈ°

рқ‘Җ (1,1)
...

. . .
. . . рқ‘Җ (T/QвҲ’1,T/QвҲ’1)

(Diagonal Block) рқ‘Җ ( рқ‘—,рқ‘— ) = SSM(рқҗҙ рқ‘—Q:( рқ‘—+1)Q, рқҗө рқ‘—Q:( рқ‘—+1)Q, рқҗ¶ рқ‘—Q:( рқ‘—+1)Q)

(Low-Rank Block) рқ‘Җ ( рқ‘—,рқ‘– ) =

рқҗ¶вҠӨ

рқ‘—Qрқҗҙ рқ‘—Q:рқ‘—QвҲ’1
...
рқҗҙ ( рқ‘—+1)QвҲ’1:рқ‘—QвҲ’1

( рқ‘—+1)QвҲ’1

пЈ®
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
пЈҜ
пЈ°

рқҗҙ рқ‘—QвҲ’1:(рқ‘–+1)QвҲ’1

пЈ№
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈ»

пЈ®
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
рқҗөвҠӨ
пЈҜ
пЈ°

(рқ‘–+1)QвҲ’1

рқҗҙ (рқ‘–+1)QвҲ’1:(рқ‘–+1)QвҲ’1

вҠӨ

пЈ№
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈ»

пЈ№
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈ»

рқ‘–Qрқҗҙ (рқ‘–+1)QвҲ’1:рқ‘–Q
рқҗөвҠӨ
...

This is easiest illustrated through an example, e.g. for T = 9 and decomposing into chunks of length Q = 3. The shaded

5Note that the block decomposition is valid even with partitions of varying size, e.g. if Q вҲӨ T, but we assume even divisibility for simplicity.

18

Structured State Space Model (SSM)Diagonal State Space ModelScalar-Identity SSMStructured Masked Attention (SMA)Semiseparable SMA1-Semiseparable SMAS4DS5S6Linear AttentionEfficient Autoregressive AttentionRetNetTransNormerGateLoopStructured State Space Duality (SSD)DSSS4cells are low-rank factorizations of the off-diagonal blocks of the semiseparable matrix.

рқ‘Җ =

=

0 рқҗҙ0:0рқҗө0
1 рқҗҙ1:0рқҗө0 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
2 рқҗҙ2:0рқҗө0 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
3 рқҗҙ3:0рқҗө0 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
4 рқҗҙ4:0рқҗө0 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
5 рқҗҙ5:0рқҗө0 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
6 рқҗҙ6:0рқҗө0 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
7 рқҗҙ7:0рқҗө0 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
8 рқҗҙ8:0рқҗө0 рқҗ¶вҠӨ

рқҗ¶вҠӨ
пЈ®
пЈҜ
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
пЈҜ
пЈ°

1 рқҗҙ1:1рқҗө1
2 рқҗҙ2:1рқҗө1 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
3 рқҗҙ3:1рқҗө1 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
4 рқҗҙ4:1рқҗө1 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
5 рқҗҙ5:1рқҗө1 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
6 рқҗҙ6:1рқҗө1 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
7 рқҗҙ7:1рқҗө1 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
8 рқҗҙ8:1рқҗө1 рқҗ¶вҠӨ

2 рқҗҙ2:2рқҗө2
3 рқҗҙ3:2рқҗө2 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
4 рқҗҙ4:2рқҗө2 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
5 рқҗҙ5:2рқҗө2 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
6 рқҗҙ6:2рқҗө2 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
7 рқҗҙ7:2рқҗө2 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
8 рқҗҙ8:2рқҗө2 рқҗ¶вҠӨ

3 рқҗҙ3:3рқҗө3
4 рқҗҙ4:3рқҗө3 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
5 рқҗҙ5:3рқҗө3 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
6 рқҗҙ6:3рқҗө3 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
7 рқҗҙ7:3рқҗө3 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
8 рқҗҙ8:3рқҗө3 рқҗ¶вҠӨ

4 рқҗҙ4:4рқҗө4
5 рқҗҙ5:4рқҗө4 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
6 рқҗҙ6:4рқҗө4 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
7 рқҗҙ7:4рқҗө4 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
8 рқҗҙ8:4рқҗө4 рқҗ¶вҠӨ

5 рқҗҙ5:5рқҗө5
6 рқҗҙ6:5рқҗө5 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
7 рқҗҙ7:5рқҗө5 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
8 рқҗҙ8:5рқҗө5 рқҗ¶вҠӨ

6 рқҗҙ6:6рқҗө6
7 рқҗҙ7:6рқҗө6 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
8 рқҗҙ8:6рқҗө6 рқҗ¶вҠӨ

7 рқҗҙ7:7рқҗө7
8 рқҗҙ8:7рқҗө7 рқҗ¶вҠӨ

8 рқҗҙ8:8рқҗө8

2 рқҗҙ2:2рқҗө2
вҠӨ

0 рқҗҙ0:0рқҗө0
1 рқҗҙ1:0рқҗө0 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
2 рқҗҙ2:0рқҗө0 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
3 рқҗҙ3:2
пЈ®
пЈҜ
4 рқҗҙ4:2
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
5 рқҗҙ5:2
пЈҜ
пЈ°
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
6 рқҗҙ6:5
пЈ®
пЈҜ
7 рқҗҙ7:5
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
8 рқҗҙ8:5
пЈҜ
пЈ°

рқҗ¶вҠӨ
пЈ®
пЈҜ
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
пЈ°

пЈ№
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈ»
пЈ№
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈ»

рқҗҙ2:2

1 рқҗҙ1:1рқҗө1
2 рқҗҙ2:1рқҗө1 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
рқҗөвҠӨ
0 рқҗҙ2:0
пЈ®
пЈҜ
рқҗөвҠӨ
1 рқҗҙ2:1
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
рқҗөвҠӨ
2 рқҗҙ2:2
пЈҜ
пЈ°
рқҗөвҠӨ
0 рқҗҙ2:0
пЈ®
пЈҜ
рқҗөвҠӨ
1 рқҗҙ2:1
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
рқҗөвҠӨ
2 рқҗҙ2:2
пЈҜ
пЈ°

рқҗҙ5:2

пЈ№
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈ»
пЈ№
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈ»

вҠӨ

рқҗ¶вҠӨ
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
рқҗ¶вҠӨ

3 рқҗҙ3:3рқҗө3
4 рқҗҙ4:3рқҗө3 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
5 рқҗҙ5:3рқҗө3 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
6 рқҗҙ6:5
пЈ®
пЈҜ
7 рқҗҙ7:5
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
8 рқҗҙ8:5
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
пЈҜ
пЈ°

пЈ№
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈ»

4 рқҗҙ4:4рқҗө4
5 рқҗҙ5:4рқҗө4 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
рқҗөвҠӨ
3 рқҗҙ5:3
пЈ®
пЈҜ
рқҗөвҠӨ
4 рқҗҙ5:4
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
5 рқҗҙ5:5
рқҗөвҠӨ
пЈҜ
пЈ°

рқҗҙ5:5

пЈ№
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈ»

5 рқҗҙ5:5рқҗө5
вҠӨ

рқҗ¶вҠӨ
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
рқҗ¶вҠӨ

6 рқҗҙ6:6рқҗө6
7 рқҗҙ7:6рқҗө6 рқҗ¶вҠӨ
8 рқҗҙ8:6рқҗө6 рқҗ¶вҠӨ

7 рқҗҙ7:7рқҗө7
8 рқҗҙ8:7рқҗө7 рқҗ¶вҠӨ

8 рқҗҙ8:8рқҗө8

пЈ№
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈ»

пЈ№
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈ»

From here we can reduce the problem into these two parts. These can also be interpreted as dividing the output of a
вҖңchunkвҖқ рқ‘Ұ рқ‘—Q:( рқ‘—+1)Q into two components: the effect of inputs within the chunk рқ‘Ҙ рқ‘—Q:( рқ‘—+1)Q, and the effect of inputs before the
chunk рқ‘Ҙ0:рқ‘—Q.

6.1 Diagonal Blocks
The diagonal blocks are easy to handle, because they are simply self-similar problems of a smaller size. The рқ‘—-th block
represents computing the answer SSM(рқҗҙрқ‘…, рқҗөрқ‘…, рқҗ¶рқ‘…)(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘…) for the range рқ‘… = рқ‘—Q : ( рқ‘— + 1)Q = ( рқ‘—Q, рқ‘—Q + 1, . . . , рқ‘—Q + Q вҲ’ 1).
In particular, for small chunk lengths Q, this
The key is that this block can be computed using any desired method.
problem is computed more efficiently using the dual quadratic SMA form. Additionally, the chunks can be computed in
parallel.

These subproblems can be interpreted as: what is the output per chunk supposing that the initial state (to the chunk) is 0.
In other words for chunk рқ‘—, this computes the correct outputs taking into account only the chunk inputs рқ‘Ҙ рқ‘—Q:( рқ‘—+1)Q.

6.2 Low-Rank Blocks
The low-rank factorizations consist of 3 terms, and there are correspondingly three pieces of the computation. In this
factorization, we will use the terminology

вҖў The terms like

вҠӨ

are called the right factors or рқҗө-block-factors.

0 рқҗҙ2:0
рқҗөвҠӨ
пЈ®
пЈҜ
рқҗөвҠӨ
1 рқҗҙ2:1
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
2 рқҗҙ2:2
рқҗөвҠӨ
пЈҜ
пЈ°

пЈ№
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈ»

вҖў The terms like рқҗҙ5:2 are called the center factors or рқҗҙ-block-factors.

вҖў The terms like

6 рқҗҙ6:5
7 рқҗҙ7:5
8 рқҗҙ8:5

рқҗ¶вҠӨ
пЈ®
пЈҜ
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
пЈҜ
пЈҜ
рқҗ¶вҠӨ
пЈҜ
пЈ°

пЈ№
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈә
пЈ»

are called the left factors or рқҗ¶-block-factors.

19

Figure 5: (SSD Algorithm.) By using the matrix transformation viewpoint of state space models to write them as
semiseparable matrices (Section 3), we develop a more hardware-efficient computation of the SSD model through a block-
decomposition matrix multiplication algorithm. The matrix multiplication also has an interpretation as a state space
model, where blocks represent chunking the input and output sequence. Diagonal blocks represent intra-chunk compu-
tations and the off-diagonal blocks represent inter-chunk computations, factored through the SSMвҖҷs hidden state.

Right Factors. This step computes the multiplication by the right рқҗө-block-factors of the low-rank factorization. Note
that for each chunk, this is a (N, Q) by (Q, P) matrix multiplication, where N is the state dimension and рқ‘ғ is the head
dimension. The result is a (N, P) tensor for each chunk, which has the same dimensionality as the expanded hidden state
в„Һ.

This can be interpreted as: what is the final state per chunk supposing that the initial state (to the chunk) is 0. In other
words this computes в„Һ рқ‘—Q+QвҲ’1 assuming that рқ‘Ҙ0:рқ‘—Q = 0.

Center Factors. This step computes the effect of the center рқҗҙ-block-factors terms in the low-rank factorization. In the
previous step, the final states per chunk have total shape (T/Q, N, P). This is now multiplied by a 1-SS matrix generated by
2QвҲ’1:QвҲ’1, рқҗҙГ—
рқҗҙГ—
This step can be computed by any algorithm for computing 1-SS multiplication (also known as the scalar SSM scan or
cumprodsum operator).

3QвҲ’1:2QвҲ’1, . . . , рқҗҙГ—

TвҲ’1:TвҲ’QвҲ’1.

This can be interpreted as: what is the actual final state per chunk taking into account all previous inputs; in other words,
this computes the true hidden state в„Һ рқ‘—Q taking into account all of рқ‘Ҙ0:( рқ‘—+1)Q.

Left Factors. This step computes the multiplication by the left рқҗ¶-block-factors of the low-rank factorization. For each
chunk, this can be represented by a matrix multiplication contract(QN, NP вҶ’ QP).
This can be interpreted as: what is the output per chunk taking into account the correct initial state в„Һ рқ‘—QвҲ’1, and supposing
the inputs рқ‘Ҙ рқ‘—Q:( рқ‘—+1)Q are 0. In other words for chunk рқ‘—, this computes the correct outputs taking into account only the prior
inputs рқ‘Ҙ0:рқ‘—Q.

6.3 Computational Cost
We define the notation BMM(B, M, N, K) to define a batched matrix multiplication contract(MK, KN вҶ’ MN) with batch di-
mension B. From this notation we can infer three aspects of the efficiency:

вҖў Computation cost: total of рқ‘Ӯ (BMNK) FLOPs.
вҖў Memory cost: total of рқ‘Ӯ (B(MK + KN + MN)) space.

20

рқ‘ӢInputsрқ‘ҢOutputsрқҗ»StatesDiagonalBlock: Input вҶ’ OutputLow-Rank Block: Input вҶ’ StateLow-Rank Block: State вҶ’ OutputLow-Rank Block: State вҶ’ StateSemiseparable Matrix Block Decompositionрқ‘ҖListing 1 Full PyTorch example of the state space dual (SSD) model.
def segsum(x):

"""Naive segment sum calculation. exp(segsum(A)) produces a 1-SS matrix,

which is equivalent to a scalar SSM."""

T = x.size(-1)
x_cumsum = torch.cumsum(x, dim=-1)
x_segsum = x_cumsum[..., :, None] - x_cumsum[..., None, :]
mask = torch.tril(torch.ones(T, T, device=x.device, dtype=bool), diagonal=0)
x_segsum = x_segsum.masked_fill(~mask, -torch.inf)
return x_segsum

def ssd(X, A, B, C, block_len=64, initial_states=None):

"""
Arguments:

X: (batch, length, n_heads, d_head)
A: (batch, length, n_heads)
B: (batch, length, n_heads, d_state)
C: (batch, length, n_heads, d_state)

Return:

Y: (batch, length, n_heads, d_head)

"""
assert X.dtype == A.dtype == B.dtype == C.dtype
assert X.shape[1] % block_len == 0

# Rearrange into blocks/chunks
X, A, B, C = [rearrange(x, "b (c l) ... -> b c l ...", l=block_len) for x in (X, A, B, C)]

A = rearrange(A, "b c l h -> b h c l")
A_cumsum = torch.cumsum(A, dim=-1)

# 1. Compute the output for each intra-chunk (diagonal blocks)
L = torch.exp(segsum(A))
Y_diag

= torch.einsum("bclhn,bcshn,bhcls,bcshp->bclhp", C, B, L, X)

# 2. Compute the state for each intra-chunk
# (right term of low-rank factorization of off-diagonal blocks; B terms)
decay_states = torch.exp((A_cumsum[:, :, :, -1:] - A_cumsum))
states = torch.einsum("bclhn,bhcl,bclhp->bchpn", B, decay_states, X)

# 3. Compute the inter-chunk SSM recurrence; produces correct SSM states at chunk boundaries
# (middle term of factorization of off-diag blocks; A terms)
if initial_states is None:

initial_states = torch.zeros_like(states[:, :1])
states = torch.cat([initial_states, states], dim=1)
decay_chunk = torch.exp(segsum(F.pad(A_cumsum[:, :, :, -1], (1, 0))))
new_states = torch.einsum("bhzc,bchpn->bzhpn", decay_chunk, states)
states, final_state = new_states[:, :-1], new_states[:, -1]

# 4. Compute state -> output conversion per chunk
# (left term of low-rank factorization of off-diagonal blocks; C terms)
state_decay_out = torch.exp(A_cumsum)
Y_off = torch.einsum('bclhn,bchpn,bhcl->bclhp', C, states, state_decay_out)

# Add output of intra-chunk and inter-chunk terms (diagonal and off-diagonal blocks)
Y = rearrange(Y_diag+Y_off, "b c l h p -> b (c l) h p")
return Y, final_state

вҖў Parallelization: larger M, N, K terms can leverage specialized matrix multiplication units on modern accelerators.

Center Blocks. The cost of the quadratic SMA computation consists of three steps (equation (16)):

вҖў Computing the kernel matrix рқҗ¶вҠӨрқҗө, which has cost BMM(T/Q, Q, Q, N).
вҖў Multiplying by the mask matrix, which is an elementwise operation on tensors of shape (T/Q, Q, Q).

вҖў Multiplying by the рқ‘Ӣ values, which has cost BMM(T/Q, Q, P, N)

21

Low-Rank Blocks: Right Factors. This step is a single matrix multiplication with cost BMM(T/Q, N, P, Q).

Low-Rank Blocks: Center Factors. This step is a scalar SSM scan (or 1-SS multiplication) of length T/Q on (N, P)
independent channels. The work of this scan is TNP/Q, which is negligible compared to the other factors.

Note that because of the blocking which reduces the length of the sequence from T to T/Q, this scan has Q times smaller cost
than a pure SSM scan (e.g. the selective scan of Mamba). Thus we observe that on most problem lengths, other algorithms
(Appendix B) may be more efficient or much easier to implement without a significant slowdown. For example, a naive
implementation of this via 1-SS matrix multiplication has cost BMM(1, T/Q, NP, T/Q), which is much easier to implement
and can be more efficient than a naive recurrence/scan implementation.

Low-Rank Blocks: Left Factors. This step is a single matrix multiplication with cost BMM(T/Q, Q, P, N).

Total Cost.
all BMM terms above become BMM(T/N, N, N, N). The computational chacteristics of this are:

If we set N = P = Q (in other words the state dimension, head dimension, and chunk length are equal), then

вҖў Total FLOP count of рқ‘Ӯ (TN2).

вҖў Total memory of рқ‘Ӯ (TN).

вҖў The work consists primarily of matrix multiplications on matrices of shape (N, N).

Notice that the memory consumption is tight; the inputs and outputs рқ‘Ҙ, рқ‘Ұ have shape (T, P) = (T, N). Meanwhile the
flop count reflects an extra factor of N, which is cost incurred by the autoregressive state size and is common to all
models.

Aside from the matmuls, there is a scalar SSM scan on NP = N2 features and sequence length T/Q. This has cost рқ‘Ӯ (T/QN2)
FLOPs and рқ‘Ӯ (log(T/Q)) depth. Although it does not use matrix multiplications, it is still parallelizable and the total work
done is negligible compared to the other steps; this has a negligible cost in our GPU implementation.

Comparison to Pure SSM and Attention Models. Quadratic attention is also very hardware efficient by only lever-
aging matrix multiplications, but has T2рқ‘Ғ total FLOPs. Its slower computation speed at both training and inference can
directly be seen as a consequence of having a larger state size вҖ“ standard attention has a state size scaling with sequence
length T because it caches its history and does not compress its state.

Linear SSMs have TNP = TN2 total FLOPs, which is the same as SSD. However, a naive implementation requires a state
expansion (15a) that materializes extra memory, and a scalar operation (15b) that does not leverage matrix multiplica-
tions.

Attention

SSM SSD

State size
Training FLOPs
Inference FLOPs

T
T2N
TN

T2
(Naive) memory
Matrix multiplication вң“

N
TN2
N2
TN2

N
TN2
N2

TN
вң“

We note that many other matrix decompositions are possible (for example, see Appendix B for a compendium of algorithms
for 1-SS multiplication through different structured matrix decompositions) which may lead to more algorithms for SSDs
that could be better for other specialized settings. Even more broadly, we note that semiseparable matrices have a rich
literature and many more representations besides the SSS form that we use (Definition 3.2), and even more efficient
algorithms may be possible.

7 The Mamba-2 Architecture

By connecting SSMs and attention, the SSD framework allows us to develop a shared vocabulary and library of techniques
for both. In this section we discuss some examples of understanding and modifying SSD layers using ideas originally

22

Figure 6: (Mamba-2 Architecture.) The Mamba-2 block simplifies the Mamba block by removing sequential linear
projections; the SSM parameters рқҗҙ, рқҗө, рқҗ¶ are produced at the beginning of the block instead of as a function of the SSM input
рқ‘Ӣ . An additional normalization layer is added as in NormFormer (Shleifer, Weston, and Ott 2021), improving stability.
The рқҗө and рқҗ¶ projections only have a single head shared across the рқ‘Ӣ heads, analogous to multi-value attention (MVA).

developed for Transformers. We discuss several design choices, resulting in the Mamba-2 architecture. These axes of
variation are ablated in Section 9.4.

7.1 Block Design
We first discuss modifications to the neural network block that are independent of the inner sequence mixing layer (i.e.
outside the core SSD layer).

Parallel Parameter Projections. Mamba-1 was motivated by an SSM-centric point of view where the selective SSM
layer is viewed as a map from рқ‘Ӣ вҶҰвҶ’ рқ‘Ң . The SSM parameters рқҗҙ, рқҗө, рқҗ¶ are viewed as subsidiary and are functions of the SSM
input рқ‘Ӣ . Thus the linear projections defining (рқҗҙ, рқҗө, рқҗ¶) occur after the initial linear projection to create рқ‘Ӣ .

In Mamba-2, the SSD layer is viewed as a map from рқҗҙ, рқ‘Ӣ, рқҗө, рқҗ¶ вҶҰвҶ’ рқ‘Ң . It therefore makes sense to produce рқҗҙ, рқ‘Ӣ, рқҗө, рқҗ¶ in parallel
with a single projection at the beginning of the block. Note the analogy to standard attention architectures, where рқ‘Ӣ, рқҗө, рқҗ¶
correspond to the рқ‘„, рқҗҫ, рқ‘ү projections that are created in parallel.

Note that adopting parallel projections for the рқҗҙ, рқҗө, рқҗ¶, рқ‘Ӣ inputs to the SSM slightly reduces parameters and more impor-
tantly is more amenable to tensor parallelism for larger models, by using standard Megatron sharding patterns (Shoeybi
et al. 2019)).

In preliminary experiments, we found that instabilities were prone to arising in larger models.
Extra Normalization.
We were able to alleviate this by adding an extra normalization layer (e.g. LayerNorm, GroupNorm, or RMSNorm) to the
block right before the final output projection. This usage of a normalization is most directly related to the NormFormer
architecture (Shleifer, Weston, and Ott 2021), which also added normalization layers at the end of the MLP and MHA
blocks.

We also note that this change is similar to other recent models related to Mamba-2 that were derived from a linear attention
viewpoint. The original linear attention formulation normalizes by a denominator term that emulates the normalization
of the softmax function in standard attention. TransNormerLLM (Qin, Dong Li, et al. 2023) and RetNet (Y. Sun et al. 2023)
find that this normalization is unstable and add an extra LayerNorm or GroupNorm after the linear attention layer. Our
extra normalization layer differs slightly from these, occuring after the multiplicative gate branch instead of before.

23

XBCXBCParallel Mamba BlockLinear projectionSequence transformationNonlinearity (activation, normalization, multiplication)X!!ConvSSMX!ConvSSMAANYYSequential Mamba Block!7.2 Multihead Patterns for Sequence Transformations
Recall that SSMs are defined as a sequence transformation (Definition 2.1) where:

вҖў рқҗҙ, рқҗө, рқҗ¶ parameters have a state dimension N.

вҖў They define a sequence transformation RT вҶ’ RT, which for example can be represented as a matrix рқ‘Җ вҲҲ R(T,T) .
вҖў This transformation operates over an input sequence рқ‘Ӣ вҲҲ R(T,P) , independently over the P axis.

One can view this as defining one head of the sequence transformation.
Definition 7.1 (Multihead patterns). A multihead sequence transformation consists of H independent heads, for a total model
dimension of D = d_model. The parameters may be tied across heads, leading to a head pattern.
The state size N and head dimension P are analogous to the рқ‘„рқҗҫ head dimension and рқ‘ү head dimension of attention, respec-
tively. Just as in modern Transformer architectures (Chowdhery et al. 2023; Touvron, Lavril, et al. 2023), in Mamba-2 we
generally choose these to be constants around 64 or 128; when the model dimension D increases, we increase the number of
heads while keeping the head dimensions N and P fixed. In order to describe how to do this, we can transfer and generalize
ideas from multihead attention to define similar patterns for SSMs, or any general sequence transformation.

Multi-head SSM
(Multi-head Attn.)

Multi-contract SSM
(Multi-query Attn.)

Multi-expand SSM
(Multi-key Attn.)

Multi-input SSM
(Multi-value Attn.)

рқ‘Ӣ (T, H, P)
рқҗҙ (T, H)
рқҗө (T, H, N)
рқҗ¶ (T, H, N)

(17)

рқ‘Ӣ (T, 1, P)
рқҗҙ (T, H)
рқҗө (T, 1, N)
рқҗ¶ (T, H, N)

(18)

рқ‘Ӣ (T, 1, P)
рқҗҙ (T, H)
рқҗө (T, H, N)
рқҗ¶ (T, 1, N)

(19)

рқ‘Ӣ (T, H, P)
рқҗҙ (T, H)
рқҗө (T, 1, N)
рқҗ¶ (T, 1, N)

(20)

Multihead SSM (MHS) / Multihead Attention (MHA) Pattern. The classic MHA pattern assumes that the head
dimension P divides the model dimension D. The number of heads is defined as H = D/P. Then, H copies of the core sequence
transformation are created by creating H independent copies of each parameter. Note that while the MHA pattern was
first described for the attention sequence transformation, it can be applied to anything compatible with Definition 2.1. For
example, a multi-head SSD layer would accept inputs with shapes according to equation (17) where the SSD algorithm is
broadcasted over the H = n_heads dimension.

Multi-contract SSM (MCS) / Multi-query Attention (MQA) Pattern. Multi-query attention (Shazeer 2019) is a clever
optimization for attention that can dramatically improve the speed of autoregressive inference, which relies on caching
the рқҗҫ and рқ‘ү tensors. This technique simply avoids giving рқҗҫ and рқ‘ү the extra head dimension, or in other words broadcasts
a single head of (рқҗҫ, рқ‘ү ) across all the heads of рқ‘„.

Using the state space duality, we can define an equivalent SSM version of MQA as equation (18). Here, рқ‘Ӣ and рқҗө (the SSM
analogs of attentionвҖҷs рқ‘ү and рқҗҫ) are shared across the H heads. We also call this the multi-contract SSM (MCS) head pattern,
because the рқҗ¶ parameter which controls the SSM state contraction has independent copies per head.

We can similarly define a multi-key attention (MKA) or multi-expand SSM (MES) head pattern, where рқҗө (which controls
the SSM expansion) is independent per head while рқҗ¶ and рқ‘Ӣ are shared across heads.

Multi-input SSM (MIS) / Multi-value Attention (MVA) Pattern. While MQA makes sense for attention because of
its KV cache, it is not the natural choice for SSMs. In Mamba, instead, рқ‘Ӣ is viewed as the main input to the SSM, and
therefore рқҗө and рқҗ¶ are parameters that are shared across the input channels. We define a new multi-value attention (MVA)
of multi-input SSM (MIS) pattern in equation (20), which can again be applied to any sequence transformation such as
SSD.

Armed with this vocabulary, we can characterize the original Mamba architecture more precisely.

Proposition 7.2. The selective SSM (S6) layer of the Mamba architecture (Gu and Dao 2023) can be viewed as having

24

вҖў Head dimension рқ‘ғ = 1: every channel has independent SSM dynamics рқҗҙ.
вҖў Multi-input SSM (MIS) or multi-value attention (MVA) head structure: the рқҗө, рқҗ¶ matrices (corresponding to рқҗҫ, рқ‘„ in the

attention duality) are shared across all channels of the input рқ‘Ӣ (corresponding to рқ‘ү in attention).

We can also ablate these head pattern variants when applied to SSD (Section 9.4.3). Interestingly, despite being controlled
in parameter counts and total state dimension, there is a noticeable difference in downstream performance. We empirically
find that the MVA pattern as originally used in Mamba performs best.

Grouped Head Patterns. The ideas of multi-query attention can be extended to grouped-query attention (Ainslie et
al. 2023): instead of 1 K and V head, one can create G independent K and V heads, where 1 < G and G divides H. This
is motivated both by bridging the performance difference between multi-query and multi-head attention, and enabling
more efficient tensor parallelism by setting G to be a multiple of the number of shards (Section 8).

Similarly, the multi-input SSM head pattern used in Mamba-2 can be easily extended to grouped-input SSM (GIS),
or synonymously grouped-value attention (GVA). The generalization is straightforward and we omit the details for
simplicity.

7.3 Other SSD Extensions from Linear Attention
We describe here an example of architectural modifications to SSD motivated by linear attention. We ablate these in
Section 9.4.3 as a form of negative result, finding that they do not significantly improve performance enough to adopt
them as default settings. Nonetheless, these illustrate how the vast literature on attention can be incorporated to define
variants of SSD. We treat the choice of kernel feature map as a hyperparameter in the Mamba-2 architecture, and expect
other simple modifications inspired by attention to be possible as well.

Kernel Attention Approximations to Softmax Attention. Many variants of linear attention or kernel attention are
motivated by viewing the attention scores softmax(рқ‘„рқҗҫ вҠӨ) as composed of

1. An exponential kernel рқ‘Қ = exp(рқ‘„рқҗҫ вҠӨ), which can be approximated by рқ‘Қ = рқң“ (рқ‘„)рқң“ (рқҗҫ)вҠӨ for some kernel feature

map.

2. Normalizing the kernel so that rows sum to 1 via рқ‘Җ = рқҗә/рқҗә11вҠӨ, where the division happens elementwise and 1 is

the all 1вҖҷs vector.

In Mamba-2, we incorporate a flexible kernel feature map, and apply it to the рқҗө
Exponential Kernel Feature Maps.
and рқҗ¶ branches (corresponding to the рқҗҫ and рқ‘ү branches in attention). The feature map can also be optionally applied to
the рқ‘Ӣ (рқ‘ү ) branch, for simplicity and symmetry. This is represented in Figure 6 by an arbitrary nonlinearity. By default,
we simply choose рқң“ to be an elementwise Swish / SiLU function (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2016; Ramachandran, Zoph, and
Le 2017). We explore other options in the ablations in Section 9.4.3, including feature maps used by Linear Attention,
Performer, Random Feature Attention, and cosFormer (Section 4.1.3).

Incorporating a Normalization (Denominator) Term. To find the denominator term, we simply have to compute
рқ‘Җ1. But recall that the final output of the model is just рқ‘Ң = рқ‘Җрқ‘Ӣ (equation (16)). So the normalization terms can be found
simply by augmenting рқ‘Ӣ with an extra column 1, resulting in a tensor of shape (T, P + 1).
Note that in this case, the kernel feature map рқң“ must be positive so that the sum is positive.

8 Systems Optimization for SSMs

We describe several systems optimizations for SSMs, in particular the Mamba-2 architecture, for large-scale efficient
training and inference. In particular, we focus on tensor parallel and sequence parallel for large-scale training, as a well
variable-length sequences for efficient finetuning and inference.

25

8.1 Tensor Parallel
Tensor parallelism (TP) (Shoeybi et al. 2019) is a model parallelism technique that splits each layer (e.g., attention, MLP)
to run on multiple accelerators such as GPUs. This technique is widely used to train most large models (Brown et al.
2020; Chowdhery et al. 2023; Touvron, Lavril, et al. 2023; Touvron, L. Martin, et al. 2023) on GPU clusters where each
node typically has 4-8 GPUs with fast networking such as NVLink. TP was originally developed for the Transformer
architecture, and it is not straight-forward to adapt it other architecture. We first show the challenge of using TP with the
Mamba architecture, and the show how the Mamba-2 architecture is designed to make TP efficient.

Recall the Mamba architecture, with a single input рқ‘ў вҲҲ RрқҗҝГ—рқ‘‘ (no batching for simplicity), input projection matrices
рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘Ҙ ),рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘§ ) вҲҲ Rрқ‘‘ Г—рқ‘’рқ‘‘ where рқ‘’ is the expansion factor (typically 2), and output projection matrix рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘ң ) вҲҲ Rрқ‘’рқ‘‘ Г—рқ‘‘ :

вҲҲ RрқҗҝГ—рқ‘’рқ‘‘
вҲҲ RрқҗҝГ—рқ‘’рқ‘‘

рқ‘Ҙ = рқ‘ўрқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘Ҙ ) вҠӨ
рқ‘§ = рқ‘ўрқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘§ ) вҠӨ
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘җ = conv1d(рқ‘Ҙ) вҲҲ RрқҗҝГ—рқ‘’рқ‘‘
О”, рқҗө, рқҗ¶ = low-rank projection(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘җ )
рқ‘Ұ = рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷрқ‘Җрқҗҙ,рқҗө,рқҗ¶,О” (рқ‘Ҙрқ‘җ ) вҲҲ RрқҗҝГ—рқ‘’рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ұрқ‘” = рқ‘Ұ В· рқңҷ (рқ‘§)
out = рқ‘Ұрқ‘”рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘ң ) вҠӨ

вҲҲ RрқҗҝГ—рқ‘‘ .

(depthwise, independent along рқ‘‘)

(independent along рқ‘‘)

(gating, e.g., with рқңҷ being SiLU)

With TP, suppose that we want to split the computation along 2 GPUs. It is easy to split the input projection matrices
рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘Ҙ ) and рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘§ ) into two partitions each of size рқ‘‘ Г— рқ‘’рқ‘‘
2 . However,
we see that since О”, рқҗө, рқҗ¶ are functions are рқ‘Ҙрқ‘җ , so we would need an extra all-reduce between the GPUs to get the whole
of рқ‘Ҙрқ‘җ before computing О”, рқҗө, рқҗ¶. After that the two GPUs can compute the SSM in parallel since they are independent
along рқ‘‘. At the end, we can split the output projection matrices рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘ң ) into two partitions each of size рқ‘’рқ‘‘
2 Г— рқ‘‘, and do an
all-reduce at the end. Compared to Transformers, we would incur two all-reduces instead of one, doubling the time spent
in communication. For large-scale Transformers training, communication might already take a significant fraction of time
(e.g. 10-20%), and doubling communication would make Mamba not as efficient for large-scale training.

2 . Then each GPU would hold half of рқ‘Ҙрқ‘җ of size рқҗҝ Г— рқ‘’рқ‘‘

With Mamba-2, our goal is to have only one all-reduce per block, similar to attention or MLP blocks in Transformers.
As a result, we have the projection to get О”, рқҗө, рқҗ¶ directly from рқ‘ў instead of from рқ‘Ҙрқ‘җ , allowing us to split these projection
matrices. This implies that we have different sets of О”, рқҗө, рқҗ¶ on different GPUs, which is equivalent to having several
вҖңgroupsвҖқ of О”, рқҗө, рқҗ¶ on a larger вҖңlogical GPUвҖқ. Moreover, we use GroupNorm within each block, with number of groups
divisible by the TP degree, so that the GPUs in a TP group do not have a communicate within the block:

рқ‘Ҙ = рқ‘ўрқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘Ҙ ) вҠӨ
рқ‘§ = рқ‘ўрқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘§ ) вҠӨ
О”, рқҗө, рқҗ¶ = projection(рқ‘ў)

вҲҲ RрқҗҝГ—рқ‘’рқ‘‘
вҲҲ RрқҗҝГ—рқ‘’рқ‘‘

(one or more groups of О”, рқҗө, рқҗ¶ per GPU)

(depthwise, independent along рқ‘‘)

(independent along рқ‘‘)

(gating, e.g., with рқңҷ being SiLU)

рқ‘Ҙрқ‘җ = conv1d(рқ‘Ҙ) вҲҲ RрқҗҝГ—рқ‘’рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ұ = рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷрқ‘Җрқҗҙ,рқҗө,рқҗ¶,О” (рқ‘Ҙрқ‘җ ) вҲҲ RрқҗҝГ—рқ‘’рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ұрқ‘” = рқ‘Ұ В· рқңҷ (рқ‘§)
рқ‘Ұрқ‘ӣ = groupnorm(рқ‘Ұрқ‘”)
out = рқ‘Ұрқ‘”рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘ң ) вҠӨ

вҲҲ RрқҗҝГ—рқ‘‘ .

(number of groups divisible by degree of tensor parallel)

We see that we only need to split the input projection matrices, and the output projection matrices, and only need to do
all-reduce at the end of the block. This is similar to the design of TP for attention and MLP layers. In particular, if we
] with рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘Ҙ )
have TP degree 2, we would split рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘Ҙ ) = [рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘Ҙ )
вҲҲ Rрқ‘‘ Г—рқ‘’рқ‘‘/2,

вҲҲ Rрқ‘‘ Г—рқ‘’рқ‘‘/2, рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘§ ) = [рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘§ )

] with рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘§ )

,рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘§ )
2

1

,рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘Ҙ )
2

1

рқ‘–

рқ‘–

26

Figure 7: (Parallelism with the Mamba-2 Block.) (Left: Tensor Parallelism) We split the input projection matrices
рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘Ҙ ),рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘§ ) and the output projection matrix рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘ң ) . Each SSM head (рқҗҙ, рқҗө, рқҗ¶, рқ‘Ӣ ) вҶҰвҶ’ рқ‘Ң lives on a single device. Choosing
GroupNorm for the final normalization layer avoids extra communication. We need one all-reduce per layer, just like the
MLP or attention blocks in a Transformer. (Right: Sequence/Context Parallelism) Analogous to the SSD algorithm,
with multiple devices, we can split along the sequence dimension. Each device computes the state of its sequence, then
pass that state to the next GPU.

and рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘ң ) =

(cid:35)

(cid:34)рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘ң )
1
рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘ң )
2

with рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘ң )

рқ‘–

вҲҲ Rрқ‘’рқ‘‘/2Г—рқ‘‘ . For рқ‘– = 1, 2, the TP Mamba-2 layer can be written as:

вҠӨ

рқ‘Ҙ (рқ‘– ) = рқ‘ўрқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘Ҙ )
рқ‘§ (рқ‘– ) = рқ‘ўрқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘§ )
О”(рқ‘– ), рқҗө (рқ‘– ), рқҗ¶ (рқ‘– ) = projection(рқ‘ў)

вҲҲ RрқҗҝГ—рқ‘’рқ‘‘/2
вҲҲ RрқҗҝГ—рқ‘’рқ‘‘/2

вҠӨ

рқ‘–

рқ‘–

(one or more groups of О”, рқҗө, рқҗ¶ per GPU)

) вҲҲ RрқҗҝГ—рқ‘’рқ‘‘/2

рқ‘Ҙ (рқ‘– )
рқ‘җ = conv1d(рқ‘Ҙ (рқ‘– ) ) вҲҲ RрқҗҝГ—рқ‘’рқ‘‘/2
рқ‘Ұ (рқ‘– ) = рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷрқ‘Җрқҗҙ,рқҗө,рқҗ¶,О” (рқ‘Ҙ (рқ‘– )
рқ‘җ
рқ‘Ұ (рқ‘– )
рқ‘” = рқ‘Ұ (рқ‘– ) В· рқңҷ (рқ‘§ (рқ‘– ) )
рқ‘ӣ = groupnorm(рқ‘Ұ (рқ‘– )
рқ‘Ұ (рқ‘– )
рқ‘” )
out(рқ‘– ) = рқ‘Ұ (рқ‘– )
рқ‘” рқ‘Ҡ (рқ‘ң )
вҲҲ RрқҗҝГ—рқ‘‘/2
рқ‘–
вҲ‘пёҒ
out(рқ‘– ) .
out =

вҠӨ

(number of groups divisible by degree of tensor parallel)

(summing outputs from all GPUs with an all-reduce)

We illustrate tensor parallel with Mamba-2 in Figure 7 (Left).

рқ‘–

8.2 Sequence Parallelism
For very long sequences, we might need to split the input and activation to different GPUs along the sequence length
dimension. There are two main techniques:

1. Sequence parallelism (SP) for the residual and normalization operations: first proposed by Korthikanti et al. (2023),
this technique decomposes the all-reduce in TP as reduce-scatter and all-gather. Noticing that the residual and
normalization operations are repeated on the same input for all GPUs in the same TP group, SP splits the activations
along the sequence length dimension by performing: reduce-scatter, residual and normalization, then all-gather.

Since the Mamba-2 architecture uses the same residual and normalization structure, SP applies without modification.

2. Sequence parallelism for the token-mixing operations (attention or SSM), also known as вҖңcontext parallelismвҖқ (CP).
Several techniques have been developed for attention layer (e.g., Ring attention (Liu, Yan, et al. 2024; Liu, Zaharia,

27

BCXAGNYBCXAGNYLayer	Input&!(#)&!(%)&&(#)&&(%)&!(')&&(')All-reduce!Inputs"Outputs#StatesGPU1GPU2GPU3Figure 8: (Multi-Query Associative Recall (MQAR)). Associative recall tasks are challenging for SSMs, which must
memorize all relevant information into their recurrent state. The SSD layer combined with improved architecture allows
for much larger state sizes in Mamba-2, which performs significantly better than Mamba-1 and even vanilla attention.

and Abbeel 2023)), with sophisticated load-balancing technique (Brandon et al. 2023). The difficulty with sequence
parallelism in attention is that we can split queries and keys into block, but each query block needs to interact with
key blocks, leading to communication bandwidth quadratic in the number of workers.

With SSMs, we can split the sequence in a simple manner: each worker takes an initial state, compute the SSM
with respect to their inputs, return the final state, and pass that final state to the next worker. The communication
bandwidth is linear in the number of workers. This decomposition is exactly the same as the block-decomposition
in the SSD algorithm (Figure 5) to split into blocks / chunks. We illustrate this context parallelism in Figure 7 (Right).

8.3 Variable Length
While pretraining often uses the same sequence lengths for the batch, during finetuning or inference, the model might
need to process different input sequences of different lengths. One naive way to handle this case is to right-pad all
sequences in the batch to the maximum length, but this can be inefficient if sequences are wildly different lengths. For
transformers, sophisticated techniques have been develop to avoid padding and do load-balancing between GPUs (Zeng
et al. 2022; Y. Zhai et al. 2023), or packing multiple sequences in the same batch and adjust the attention mask (Ding
et al. 2024; Pouransari et al. 2024). With SSMs and Mamba in particular, we can handle variable sequence lengths by
simply treating the whole batch as one long sequence, and avoid passing the states between individual sequences. This is
equivalent to simply setting рқҗҙрқ‘Ў = 0 for tokens рқ‘Ў at the end of one sequence to prevent it from passing information to the
token рқ‘Ў + 1, which belongs to a different sequence.

9 Empirical Validation

We empirically evaluate Mamba-2 on synthetic recall tasks that have been challenging for recurrent models (Section 9.1),
and standard language modeling pre-training and downstream evaluations (Section 9.2). We validate that our SSD algo-
rithm is much more efficient than Mamba-1 (Section 9.3) and comparable to optimized attention for moderate sequence
lengths. Finally, we ablate various design choices in the Mamba-2 architecture (Section 9.4).

9.1 Synthetics: Associative Recall
Synthetic associative recall tasks have been popular for testing the ability of language models to look up information in
their context. Broadly, they involve feeding autoregressive models pairs of key-value associations, and then prompting the
model to produce the correct completion upon being shown a previously-seen key. The multi-query associative recall
(MQAR) task is a particular formulation of this task that requires the model to memorize multiple associations (Arora,
Eyuboglu, Timalsina, et al. 2024). The original Mamba paper reported results on related synthetic tasks, in particular
Selective Copying (Gu and Dao 2023) and Induction Heads (Olsson et al. 2022), which can be seen as easier associative
recall tasks. The MQAR task is also closely related to вҖңphonebook look-upвҖқ tasks which has been shown to be challenging
for recurrent models such as SSMs, due to their finite state capacity (De et al. 2024; Jelassi et al. 2024).

28

3264128256Model dimension0.000.250.500.751.00AccuracySequence Length: 2563264128256Model dimensionSequence Length: 5123264128256Model dimensionSequence Length: 1024AttentionBasedMamba (N=16)Mamba-2 (N=16)Mamba-2 (N=64)Mamba-2 (N=256)Figure 9: (Scaling Laws.) Models of size вүҲ 125рқ‘Җ to вүҲ 1.3рқҗө parameters, trained on the Pile. Mamba-2 matches or exceeds
the performance of Mamba as well as a strong вҖңTransformer++вҖқ recipe. Compared to our Transformer baseline, Mamba-2
is Pareto dominant on performance (perplexity), theoretical FLOPs, and actual wall-clock time.

Table 1: (Zero-shot Evaluations.) Best results for each size in bold, second best unlined. We compare against open source LMs with
various tokenizers, trained for up to 300B tokens. Pile refers to the validation split, comparing only against models trained on the same
dataset and tokenizer (GPT-NeoX-20B). For each model size, Mamba-2 outperforms Mamba, and generally matches Pythia at twice the
model size. Full results in Table 10.

Model

Token.

NeoX
Pythia-1B
NeoX
Mamba-790M
Mamba-2-780M NeoX
GPT2
Hybrid H3-1.3B
NeoX
Pythia-1.4B
NeoX
RWKV4-1.5B
NeoX
Mamba-1.4B
NeoX
Mamba-2-1.3B

Hybrid H3-2.7B
Pythia-2.8B
RWKV4-3B
Mamba-2.8B
Mamba-2-2.7B

GPT2
NeoX
NeoX
NeoX
NeoX

Pile
ppl вҶ“

7.82
7.33
7.26
вҖ”
7.51
7.70
6.80
6.66
вҖ”
6.73
7.00
6.22
6.09

LAMBADA LAMBADA HellaSwag
ppl вҶ“

acc вҶ‘

acc вҶ‘

PIQA Arc-E Arc-C WinoGrande OpenbookQA Average
acc вҶ‘

acc вҶ‘

acc вҶ‘

acc вҶ‘

acc вҶ‘

acc вҶ‘

7.92
6.02
5.86
11.25
6.08
7.04
5.04
5.02
7.92
5.04
5.24
4.23
4.10

56.1
62.7
61.7

49.6
61.7
56.4
65.0
65.7
55.7
64.7
63.9
69.2
69.7

47.2
55.1
54.9

52.6
52.1
52.5
59.1
59.9
59.7
59.3
59.6
66.1
66.6

70.7
72.1
72.0

71.3
71.0
72.4
74.2
73.2

73.3
74.0
73.7
75.2
76.4

57.0
61.2
61.0

59.2
60.5
60.5
65.5
64.3

65.6
64.1
67.8
69.7
69.6

27.1
29.5
28.5

28.1
28.5
29.4
32.8
33.3
32.3
32.9
33.1
36.3
36.4

53.5
56.1
60.2
56.9
57.2
54.6
61.5
60.9

61.4
59.7
59.6
63.5
64.0

31.4
34.2
36.2
34.4
30.8
34.0
36.4
37.8
33.6
35.2
37.0
39.6
38.8

49.0
53.0
53.5
50.3
51.7
51.4
56.4
56.4
54.5
55.7
56.4
59.9
60.2

Figure 10: (Efficiency Benchmarks.) (Left) Our SSD is 2 вҲ’ 8Г— faster than a Mamba fused scan for large state expansion
(рқ‘Ғ = 64) and faster than FlashAttention-2 for sequence length 2k and above. (Right) Sequence length 4K: Increasing state
expansion slows down the Mamba optimized scan implementation linearly. SSD can handle much larger state expansion
factors without much slowdown.

29

         * 0 3 4 W   P S K  W G E P I      ВӮ     ВӮ     ВӮ     ВӮ    4 I V T P I \ M X ]   P S K  W G E P I  7 G E P M R K  0 E [ W  S R  8 L I  4 M P I   7 I U Y I R G I  0 I R K X L       8 V E R W J S V Q I V   1 E Q F E 1 E Q F E  5121k2k4k8k16k32k64k128k256k512kSequence length0.11101001000Time (ms)SSD, Scan, Convolution vs Attention time (A100 80GB PCIe)FlashAttention-2ConvolutionScan (PyTorch), state dim 64Scan (Mamba), state dim 64SSD (ours), state dim 6448163264128256State dim01234567Time (ms)SSD vs Scan time (A100 80GB PCIe)FlashAttention-2Scan (Mamba)SSD (ours)We compare on a challenging version of the MQAR setup from (Arora, Eyuboglu, Zhang, et al. 2024), using a harder task,
longer sequences, and smaller models. Our baselines include standard multi-head softmax attention as well as the Based
architecture which combines convolutions, local attention, and a linear attention variant.

Results are shown in Figure 8. While Mamba-1 struggles on this task, Mamba-2 performs well across all settings. Sur-
prisingly, it is significantly better than Mamba-1 even when the state sizes are controlled (N = 16). (We are not sure which
aspect of the architecture is the predominant factor, which remains a question to explore in future work.) Additionally,
this task validates the importance of state size: increasing from N = 16 to N = 64 and N = 256 consistently improves
performance on MQAR, as the larger state allows more information (key-value pairs) to be memorized.

9.2 Language Modeling
Following standard protocols in LLMs, we train and evaluate the Mamba-2 architecture on standard autoregressive lan-
guage modeling against other architectures. We compare both pretraining metrics (perplexity) and zero-shot evaluations.
The model sizes (depth and width) follow GPT3 specifications, from 125m to 2.7B. We use the Pile dataset (L. Gao, Bider-
man, et al. 2020), and follow the training recipe described in Brown et al. (2020). This follows the same setup as reported
in Mamba (Gu and Dao 2023); training details are in Appendix D.

9.2.1 Scaling Laws

For baselines, we compare against both Mamba and its Transformer++ recipe (Gu and Dao 2023), which is based on the
PaLM and LLaMa architectures (e.g. rotary embedding, SwiGLU MLP, RMSNorm instead of LayerNorm, no linear bias, and
higher learning rates). As Mamba has already demonstrated that it outperforms the standard Transformer architecture
(GPT3 architecture) as well as recent subquadratic architectures (H3 (Dao, D. Y. Fu, et al. 2023), Hyena (Poli et al. 2023),
RWKV-4 (B. Peng, Alcaide, et al. 2023), RetNet (Y. Sun et al. 2023)), we omit those in the plot for clarity (see Gu and Dao
(2023) for comparisons).

Figure 9 shows scaling laws under the standard Chinchilla (Hoffmann et al. 2022) protocol, on models from вүҲ 125рқ‘Җ to
вүҲ 1.3рқҗө parameters.

9.2.2 Downstream Evaluations

Table 1 shows the performance of Mamba-2 on a range of popular downstream zero-shot evaluation tasks, compared
to the most well-known open source models at these sizes, most importantly Pythia (Biderman et al. 2023) which were
trained with the same tokenizer, dataset, and training length (300B tokens) as our models.

9.2.3 Hybrid Models: Combining SSD Layer with MLP and Attention

Recent and concurrent work (Dao, D. Y. Fu, et al. 2023; De et al. 2024; Glorioso et al. 2024; Lieber et al. 2024) suggests that a
hybrid architecture with both SSM layers and attention layers could improve the model quality over that of a Transformer,
or a pure SSM (e.g., Mamba) model, especially for in-context learning. We explore the different ways that SSD layers can
be combined with attention and MLP to understand the benefits of each. Empirically we find that having around 10% of
the total number of layers being attention performs best. Combining SSD layers, attention layers, and MLP also works
better than either pure Transformer++ or Mamba-2.

SSD and Attention We find that SSD and attention layers are complementary: by themselves (e.g. in the Mamba-2
architecture vs. Transformer++) their performance (measured by perplexity) is nearly the same, but a mixture of SSD
and attention layers outperforms the pure Mamba-2 or Transformer++ architecture. We show some results (Table 2)
for the 350M model (48 layers) trained to 7B tokens on the Pile with the GPT-2 tokenizer (same number of parameters,
same hyperparameters, same training and validation set). Adding in just a few attention layers already yields notable
improvement and strikes the best balance between quality and efficiency. We hypothesize that the SSM layers function
well as a general sequence-to-sequence mapping, and attention layers act as a retrieval mechanism to quickly refer to
previous tokens in the sequence instead of forcing the model to compress all the context to its memory (SSM states).

30

Table 2: (Combining SSD and Attention Blocks.) Perplexity of a 350M model with 48 layers, with different number of
attention layers. Having around a 10% ratio of attention layers performs best.

Num. Attn Blocks

0 (Mamba-2)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

9

11

15

24

Transformer++

Perplexity вҶ“

8.60

8.38

8.32

8.29

8.29

8.28

8.26

8.27

8.28

8.30

8.34

8.50

8.68

Hybrid Models with SSD, MLP, and Attention We compare different ways that SSD can be combined with the (gated)
MLP and attention layers, and evaluate at the 2.7B scale (64 layers), trained to 300B tokens on the Pile (same number of
parameters, same hyperparameters, same training and validation set, same data order):

1. Transformer++: 32 attention layers and 32 gated MLP, interleaving.

2. Mamba-2: 64 SSD layers.

3. Mamba-2-MLP: 32 SSD and 32 gated MLP layers, interleaving.

4. Mamba-2-Attention: 58 SSD layers and 6 attention layers (at indices 9, 18, 27, 36, 45, 56)6.

5. Mamba-2-MLP-Attention: 28 SSD layers and 4 attention layers, interleaving with 32 gated MLP layers.

We report the validation perplexity on the Pile, as well as zero-shot evaluation, in Table 3. In general, the quality of
Transformer++ and Mamba-2 models are around the same. We see that adding just 6 attention layers noticeably improves
over the pure Mamba-2 model (and over Transformer++). Adding MLP layers reduces model quality, but can (i) speed up
training and inference due to the simplicity and hardware-efficiency of the MLP layer (ii) be easier to up-cycle to MoE
models by replacing MLP layers with mixture-of-experts.

Table 3: (Zero-shot Evaluations.) Best results for each size in bold. We compare different ways SSD, MLP, and attention layers can
be combined, evaluated at 2.7B scale trained to 300B tokens on the Pile.

Model

Token.

NeoX
Transformer++
NeoX
Mamba-2
NeoX
Mamba-2-MLP
Mamba-2-Attention
NeoX
Mamba-2-MLP-Attention NeoX

Pile
ppl вҶ“
6.13
6.09
6.13
5.95
6.00

LAMBADA LAMBADA HellaSwag
ppl вҶ“
3.99
4.10
4.18
3.85
3.95

acc вҶ‘
66.4
66.6
65.0
67.8
66.6

acc вҶ‘
70.3
69.7
69.3
71.1
70.0

PIQA Arc-E Arc-C WinoGrande OpenbookQA Average
acc вҶ‘
75.2
76.4
76.4
75.8
75.4

acc вҶ‘
60.2
60.2
59.6
61.0
60.7

acc вҶ‘
63.9
64.0
63.1
65.3
64.6

acc вҶ‘
67.7
69.6
68.1
69.9
70.6

acc вҶ‘
37.8
36.4
37.0
37.8
38.6

40.4
38.8
38.2
39.0
39.2

acc вҶ‘

9.3 Speed Benchmarks
We benchmark the speed of the SSD algorithm against MambaвҖҷs scan implementation and FlashAttention-2 (Figure 10).
SSD, thanks to its reformulation to use matrix multiplication as a subroutine, can exploit specialized matrix multiplication
(matmul) units on GPUs, also known as tensor cores. As a result, it is 2-8Г— faster than MambaвҖҷs fused associative scan,
which does not leverage matmul units. Due to its linear scaling in sequence length, SSD is faster than FlashAttention-2
starting at sequence length 2рқҗҫ.

However, we note that the Mamba-2 model as a whole might not be as efficient to train as Transformer at short sequence
length (e.g. at 2рқҗҫ), since a Transformer with рқҗҝ layers would have рқҗҝ
2 attention layers, while a Mamba-2
model would have рқҗҝ SSD layers for the same number of parameters. Generally the MLP layers are very hardware efficient
since they consist of simple matrix multiplication and pointwise linearity. As shown in Section 9.2.3, one can also combine
2 SSD layers and рқҗҝ
рқҗҝ

2 MLP layers to speed up training at short sequence length.

2 MLP layers and рқҗҝ

6In small-scale experiments, we find that as long as the attention layers are spaced out, not at the very beginning or at the very end, the model

quality does not depend very much on the exact location of the attention layers.

31

Table 4: (Ablations: Mamba-2 block.) We ablate the major differences between the Mamba-2 and Mamba-1 neural
network blocks (Figure 6, Section 7.1). Note that these components are independent of the inner sequence mixing layer;
in these ablations, we use SSD for the inner SSM layer (differing from the S6 layer of Mamba-1).

Block

рқҗҙрқҗөрқҗ¶рқ‘Ӣ Projections

Extra Normalization Parameters

Perplexity

Mamba-1

Mamba-2

Sequential
Sequential
Parallel
Parallel

вң—
вң“
вң—
вң“

129.3M
129.3M
126.5M
126.5M

11.76
11.54
11.66
11.49

9.4 Architecture Ablations

9.4.1 Block Design

Section 7.1 introduces the Mamba-2 block, which has small modifications to the Mamba-1 block which are partly motivated
by the connection to attention and also to improve the scalability of Mamba-2. Table 4 ablates these architecture changes
to the block, which occur outside of the core SSM layer.

The ablations validate that parallel projections to create (рқҗҙ, рқҗө, рқҗ¶, рқ‘Ӣ ) saves parameters and performs slightly better than
MambaвҖҷs sequential projections. More importantly, this modification is amenable to tensor parallelism at larger model
sizes (Section 8). Additionally, the extra normalization layer also slightly improves performance. More importantly, pre-
liminary experiments at larger scales observed that it also helps with training stability.

9.4.2 Head Structure

Section 7.2 describes how the dimensions of the рқҗө, рқҗ¶, рқ‘Ӣ projections can be viewed as a hyperparameter analogous to
notions of multi-head attention and multi-query attention. We also showed how the original Mamba architecture is
analogous to multi-value attention (Proposition 7.2), which was a choice that naturally developed from the state-space
model point of view and was not previously ablated.

Table 5 ablates choices of the multi-head structure for the Mamba-2 architecture. Strikingly, we find a large difference
between multi-value and multi-query or multi-key head patterns, despite seeming very similar. Note that this is not
explained by the total state size, which is the same for all of them (equal to HPN or the product of the number of heads,
head dimension, and state dimension).

We also compare to multi-head patterns where the number of рқҗ¶, рқҗө, рқ‘Ӣ (analogous to рқ‘„, рқҗҫ, рқ‘ү ) heads is equal. We compare
against the standard multi-head pattern, as well as one with aggressive sharing where they all have only 1 head. Note
that in the latter case, the model still has H different sequence mixers рқ‘Җ, because each head still has a different рқҗҙ. When
parameter matched, these multi-head patterns perform similarly to each other, in between the MVA and MQA/MKA
patterns.

9.4.3 Attention Kernel Approximations

Section 7.3 noted how SSD can be combined with ideas from the linear attention literature, such as various forms of
kernel approximations. We ablate several variants of these suggested by previous works in Table 6. These include the
cosFormer (Qin, Weixuan Sun, et al. 2022), Random Feature Attention H. Peng et al. 2021, and Positive Random Features
(Performer) (Choromanski et al. 2021).

We also ablate adding a normalization term, akin to the denominator of the softmax function in standard attention. We
found that this introduced instabilities to most variants, but slightly improved performance for the ReLU activation func-
tion рқң“ .

Table 7 also tests more recent proposals to improve linear attention that involve expanding the feature dimension (Based (Arora,
Eyuboglu, Zhang, et al. 2024) and ReBased (Aksenov et al. 2024)). These linear attention extensions aim to appropriate
the exp kernel with a quadratic approximation. ReBased also proposes to replace the QK activation function with a layer
normalization; from an SSM-centric view we apply a normalization on top of (рқҗө, рқҗ¶) before applying the SSM function.

32

Table 5: (Ablations: Multi-head structure.) All models have state expansion factor рқ‘Ғ = 64 and head size рқ‘ғ = 64 and
are trained to Chinchilla scaling law token counts. The number of рқҗҙ heads is always equal to the total heads H, i.e. each
head has a separate input-dependent рқҗҙ decay factor. (Top) 125M models, 2.5B tokens (Bottom) 360M models, 7B tokens

SSM Head Pattern

Attn. Analog

рқҗҙ heads

рқҗө heads

рқҗ¶ heads

рқ‘Ӣ heads

Layers

Params

Ppl.

Multi-input (MIS)
Multi-value (MVA)
Multi-contract (MCS) Multi-query (MQA)
Multi-expand (MES)
Multi-head (MHS)
Multi-state (MSS)

Multi-key (MKA)
Multi-head (MHA)
-

Multi-input (MIS)
Multi-value (MVA)
Multi-contract (MCS) Multi-query (MQA)
Multi-expand (MES)
Multi-head (MHS)
Multi-state (MSS)

Multi-key (MKA)
Multi-head (MHA)
-

24
24
24
24
24

32
32
32
32
32

1
1
24
24
1

1
1
32
1
32

1
24
1
24
1

1
32
1
1
32

24
1
1
24
1

32
1
1
1
32

24
24
24
15
36

48
48
48
70
29

126.5M 11.66
126.5M 12.62
126.5M 12.59
127.6M 12.06
129.6M 12.00

361.8M 8.73
361.8M 9.33
361.8M 9.36
361.3M 9.01
357.3M 9.04

Table 6: (Ablations: Kernel approximations.) We test var-
ious proposals for the kernel activation function рқң“ , including
linear attention variants aiming to approximate the exp ker-
nel from standard softmax attention.

Table 7: (Ablations: Kernel approximations.) We
test the (Re)Based methods for linear attention approx-
imations, which involve expanded feature maps. (Top)
130M models. (Top) 380M models with рқ‘Ғ = 256.

Kernel activation рқң‘

none
Swish
Exp
ReLU
ReLU + normalization

cosFormer
Random Feature Attention
Positive Random Features (Performer)

Perplexity

Kernel activation рқң‘

Perplexity

11.58
11.66
11.62
11.73
11.64

11.97
11.57
12.21

Swish
Swish + Taylor (Based)
LayerNorm
LayerNorm + Square (ReBased)

Swish
Swish + Taylor (Based)
LayerNorm
LayerNorm + Square (ReBased)

11.67
12.19
11.50
11.84

8.58
8.71
8.61
8.63

We note that this technique has been independently proposed as the вҖңQK-NormвҖқ for softmax attention (Team 2024) and
an вҖңinternal normalizationвҖқ for Mamba (Lieber et al. 2024).

Overall, Table 6 and Table 7 found that the kernel approximation methods we tried did not seem to improve over simple
pointwise non-linear activation functions for рқң“ . Thus our default settings for Mamba-2 used рқң“ (рқ‘Ҙ) = Swish(рқ‘Ҙ) to follow
Mamba-1, but we suggest that removing this activation entirely may be a simpler choice that we did not extensively
test.

We emphasize however that SSD and vanilla linear attention differ in the inclusion of the 1-semiseparable mask рқҗҝ, while
the various linear attention methods in the literature were derived to approximate softmax attention without this term;
thus, our negative results may be not unexpected.

10 Related Work and Discussion

The state space duality framework bridges connections between SSMs, structured matrices, and attention. We discuss in
more depth the relations between SSD and these concepts more broadly. Using ideas from each of the viewpoints, we also
suggest some directions that the SSD framework can be extended in future work.

10.1 State Space Models
Structured state space models can be characterized along the axes

33

(i) whether it is time-invariant or time-varying.

(ii) the dimensionality of the system.

(iii) the structure on the recurrent transitions рқҗҙ.

SSD can be described as a selective SSM with SISO dimensions and scalar-identity structure.

Time Variance (Selectivity). The original structured SSMs (S4) were linear time-invariant (LTI) systems (Gu 2023; Gu,
Goel, and RГ© 2022) motivated by continuous-time online memorization (Gu, Dao, et al. 2020; Gu, Johnson, Goel, et al. 2021;
Gu, Johnson, Timalsina, et al. 2023). Many variants of structured SSMs have been proposed (Dao, D. Y. Fu, et al. 2023; Gu,
Gupta, et al. 2022; Gupta, Gu, and Berant 2022; Ma et al. 2023; J. T. Smith, Warrington, and Linderman 2023), including
several that drop the recurrence and focus on the convolutional representation of LTI SSMs (D. Y. Fu et al. 2023; Y. Li et al.
2023; Poli et al. 2023; Qin, Han, Weixuan Sun, B. He, et al. 2023).

SSD is a time-varying structured SSM, also known as a selective SSM introduced in Mamba (Gu and Dao 2023). Selective
SSMs are closely related to gating mechanisms of RNNs, including classical RNNs such as the LSTM (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997) and GRU (J. Chung et al. 2014) as well as more modern variants such as the QRNN (Bradbury et al.
2016), SRU (Lei 2021; Lei et al. 2017), RWKV (B. Peng, Alcaide, et al. 2023), HGRN (Qin, Yang, and Zhong 2023), and
Griffin (Botev et al. 2024; De et al. 2024). These RNNs differ in their parameterizations in various ways, most importantly
in the lack of a state expansion.

Dimensionality and State Expansion. An important characteristic of SSD, shared by previous SSMs in its lineage (S4,
H3, Mamba), is that it is a single-input single-output (SISO) system where input channels are processed independently.
This leads to a much larger effective state size of ND where N is the SSM state size (also called state expansion factor) and
D is the standard model dimension. Traditional RNNs either have N = 1 or are multi-input multi-output (MIMO) with
dense рқҗө, рқҗ¶ matrices, either of which leads to a smaller state. While MIMO SSMs have been shown to work well in some
domains (Lu et al. 2023; Orvieto et al. 2023; J. T. Smith, Warrington, and Linderman 2023), Mamba showed that state
expansion is crucial for information-dense domains such as language. One of the main advantages of SSD is allowing for
even larger state expansion factors without slowing down the model. Many subsequent works have since adopted state
expansion (Section 10.4).

Structure. Compared to previous structured SSMs, the main restriction of SSD is on the expressivity of the state tran-
sitions рқҗҙрқ‘Ў . We note that more general SSMs, such as the case of diagonal рқҗҙрқ‘Ў , have the same theoretical efficiency as SSD,
but are less hardware-friendly. This is because the dual quadratic form loses its attention-like interpretation and becomes
more difficult to compute. Thus compared to Mamba, SSD differs only in a slightly more restrictive form of diagonal рқҗҙрқ‘Ў ,
and trades off this expressivity for improved hardware efficiency (and ease of implementation).

We hypothesize that it may be possible to refine our structured matrix algorithms to improve to the general diagonal SSM
case as well.

10.2 Structured Matrices
The first viewpoint of the state space duality adopts the viewpoint of these models as matrix sequence transformations
or вҖңmatrix mixersвҖқ: sequence transformations (Definition 2.1) that can be represented as matrix multiplication (by a T Г— T
matrix) along the sequence dimension T.

Several such matrix mixers have been proposed before, where the primary axis of variation is the representation of the
matrix. These include MLP-Mixer (Tolstikhin et al. 2021) (unstructured matrix), FNet (Lee-Thorp et al. 2021) (Fourier
Transform matrix), M2 (Dao, B. Chen, et al. 2022; Dao, Gu, et al. 2019; Dao, Sohoni, et al. 2020; D. Fu et al. 2024) (butter-
fly/monarch matrix), Toeplitz matrices (Poli et al. 2023; Qin, Han, Weixuan Sun, B. He, et al. 2023), and even more exotic
structures (De Sa et al. 2018; Thomas et al. 2018).

An important characterization is that efficient (sub-quadratic) matrix sequence transformations are exactly those which
have structured matrix mixers. A core result of the SSD framework is viewing SSMs as matrix mixers with a particular
structure вҖ“ semiseparable matrices (Section 3). The linear vs. quadratic duality then takes the form of structured matrix
multiplication vs. naive matrix multiplication.

34

The structure matrix representation led to our efficient SSD algorithm through block decompositions of particular semisep-
arable matrices (Section 6). We note that semiseparable matrices are well-studied in the scientific computing literature,
and incorporating those ideas may be a promising avenue for more improvements to state space models. We also suggest
that focusing on the matrix mixer viewpoint can lead to more fruitful directions for sequence models, such as designing
principled non-causal variants of Mamba, or finding ways to characterize and bridge the gap between softmax attention
and sub-quadratic models through analyzing their matrix transformation structure.

10.3 (Linear) Attention
Compared to standard (causal) attention, SSD has only two main differences.

First, SSD does not use the softmax activation of standard attention (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015; Vaswani et al. 2017),
which is what gives attention its quadratic complexity. When the softmax is dropped, the sequence can be computed with
linear scaling through the linear attention framework (Katharopoulos et al. 2020).

Second, SSD multiplies the logits matrix by an input-dependent 1-semiseparable mask. Thus this mask can be viewed as
replacing the softmax in standard attention.

This semiseparable mask can also be viewed as providing positional information. The elements рқ‘Һрқ‘Ў act as вҖңgatesвҖқ in the RNN
sense, or a вҖңselectionвҖқ mechanism (see discussion in Mamba paper), and their cumulative products рқ‘Һ рқ‘—:рқ‘– control how much
interaction is allowed between positions рқ‘– and рқ‘—. Positional embeddings (e.g. sinusoidal (Vaswani et al. 2017), AliBi (Press,
N. Smith, and Lewis 2022), and RoPE (Su et al. 2021)) are an important component of Transformers that are often viewed
as heuristics, and the 1-SS mask of SSD can be seen as a more principled form of relative positional embeddings. We note
that this view was also posited concurrently by GateLoop (Katsch 2023).

The second viewpoint of state space duality is a special case of our more general structured masked attention (SMA)
framework, where the duality is revealed as different contraction orderings on a simple 4-way tensor contraction. SMA
is a strong generalization of linear attention that is much more general than SSD as well; other forms of structured masks
may lead to more variants of efficient attention with different properties than SSD.

Beside leading to new models, these connections to attention can lead to other directions for understanding SSMs. For
example, we are curious whether the phenomenon of attention sinks (Darcet et al. 2024; Xiao et al. 2024) exist for Mamba
models, and more broadly whether interpretability techniques can be transferred to SSMs (Ali, Zimerman, and Wolf
2024).

Finally, many other variants of linear attention have been proposed (Arora, Eyuboglu, Timalsina, et al. 2024; Arora,
Eyuboglu, Zhang, et al. 2024; Choromanski et al. 2021; H. Peng et al. 2021; Qin, Han, Weixuan Sun, Dongxu Li, et al. 2022;
Qin, Weixuan Sun, et al. 2022; Schlag, Irie, and Schmidhuber 2021; Zhang et al. 2024; Zheng, C. Wang, and Kong 2022)
(see Section 4.1.3 for descriptions of several of these), and we expect that many techniques can be transferred to SSMs
(e.g. Section 7.3).

We emphasize that SSD does not generalize standard softmax attention, or any other transformation on the attention
kernel matrix that does not have a finite feature map рқң“ . Compared to general attention, SSDвҖҷs advantage is having a
controllable state expansion factor N that compresses the history, compared to quadratic attentionвҖҷs cache of the entire
history scaling with sequence length T вү« N. Concurrent work has starting studying the tradeoffs of these representations,
for example on copying and in-context learning tasks (AkyГјrek et al. 2024; Grazzi et al. 2024; Jelassi et al. 2024; Park et al.
2024). We note that Mamba-2 significantly improves on Mamba on some of these capabilities (e.g. as demonstrated by
MQAR results in Section 9.1), but more remains to be understood.

10.4 Related Models
We finally highlight a growing body of recent and concurrent work that have developed sequence models very similar to
Mamba and Mamba-2.

вҖў RetNet (Y. Sun et al. 2023) and TransNormerLLM (Qin, Dong Li, et al. 2023) generalize Linear Attention using decay
terms instead of a cumulative sum, and propose dual parallel/recurrent algorithms as well as a hybrid вҖңchunkwiseвҖқ
mode. These algorithms can be seen as an instantiation of SSD where рқҗҙрқ‘Ў is time-invariant (constant for all рқ‘Ў); in the
SMA interpretation, the mask matrix рқҗҝ would be a decay matrix рқҗҝрқ‘–,рқ‘— = рқӣҫрқ‘– вҲ’ рқ‘— . These models also differ architecturally in

35

various ways. For example, since they were derived from an attention-centric perspective they preserve the multi-head
attention (MHA) pattern; since Mamba-2 was derived from an SSM-centric pattern it preserves the multi-value attention
(MVA) or multi-expand SSM (MES) pattern, which we show to be better (Section 9.4).

вҖў GateLoop (Katsch 2023) concurrently proposed using input-dependent decay factors рқҗҙрқ‘Ў , and developed the same dual

quadratic form as in SSD which they call a вҖңsurrogate attentionвҖқ form.

вҖў Gated Linear Attention (GLA) (Yang et al. 2024) proposed a variant of linear attention with data-dependent gates, along

with efficient algorithms to compute a chunkwise mode and hardware-aware implementations.

вҖў HGRN (Qin, Yang, and Zhong 2023) introduced an RNN with input-dependent gates, which was improved to incorporate

state expansion in HGRN2 (Qin, Yang, Weixuan Sun, et al. 2024).

вҖў Griffin (De et al. 2024) and RecurrentGemma (Botev et al. 2024) showed that an RNN with input-dependent gating,
combined with local attention, can be very competitive with strong modern Transformers. Jamba also showed that
combining Mamba with a few layers of attention performs very well on language modeling (Lieber et al. 2024).

вҖў xLSTM (Beck et al. 2024) improves the xLSTM by adopting the idea of state expansion and other gating, normalization,

and stabilization techniques.

вҖў RWKV(-4) (B. Peng, Alcaide, et al. 2023) is an RNN based on a different linear attention approximation (the attention-free
Transformer (S. Zhai et al. 2021)). It has recently been improved to the RWKV-5/6 (Eagle and Finch) architectures (B.
Peng, Goldstein, et al. 2024) by adopting the ideas of selectivity and state expansion.

11 Conclusion

We proposed a theoretical framework based on well-studied classes of structured matrices that bridges the conceptual gap
between SSMs and attention variants. This framework yields insights on how recent SSMs (e.g. Mamba) perform as well as
Transformers on language modeling. Moreover, our theoretical tools provide new ideas to improve SSMs (and potentially
Transformers) by connecting the algorithmic and systems advances on both sides. As a demonstration, the framework
guides our design of a new architecture (Mamba-2) at the intersection of SSMs and structured attention.

Acknowledgments

We thank Angela Wu for the suggestion on how to efficiently compute the gradient of О” in a numerically stable manner.
We thank Sukjun Hwang and Aakash Lahoti for assistance with the MQAR experiments.