---
paper_id: 2308.11197
source: arxiv
title: How to train accurate and generalizable machine learning models
converted_at: 2026-03-20T23:38:01.286543
note: "Content extracted before References section"
---

Toward Generalizable Machine Learning Models in Speech, Language, and

Hearing Sciences: Estimating Sample Size and Reducing Overfitting

Hamzeh Ghasemzadeh a,b,c, Robert E. Hillman a,b,d,e, Daryush D. Mehta a,b,d,e

a Center for Laryngeal Surgery and Voice Rehabilitation, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
b Department of Surgery, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
c Department of Communicative Sciences and Disorders, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA
d Speech and Hearing Bioscience and Technology, Division of Medical Sciences, Harvard Medical School,

Boston, MA, USA

e MGH Institute of Health Professions, Boston, MA, USA

Running Title: Power Analysis and Reducing Overfitting in Machine Learning

Email Address of the Authors:
Hamzeh Ghasemzadeh, email: anonymous@anonymous.org
Robert E. Hillman, email: anonymous@anonymous.org
Daryush D. Mehta, email: anonymous@anonymous.org

Corresponding Author:
Hamzeh Ghasemzadeh
Center for Laryngeal Surgery and Voice Rehabilitation
Massachusetts General Hospital
One Bowdoin Square, 11th Floor
Boston, MA 02114

ABSTRACT
Purpose:    Many  studies  using  machine  learning  (ML)  in  speech,  language,  and  hearing  sciences  rely  upon  cross-
validations  with  single  data  splitting.  This  study’s  first  purpose  is  to  provide  quantitative  evidence  that  would
incentivize  researchers  to  instead  use  the more  robust  data splitting  method  of nested  k-fold  cross-validation.  The
second purpose is to present methods and MATLAB code to perform power analysis for ML-based analysis during
the design of a study.

Method:  First, the  significant impact of different cross-validations on ML outcomes was demonstrated using real-
world clinical data. Then, Monte Carlo simulations were used to quantify the interactions among the employed cross-
validation method, the discriminative power of features, the dimensionality of the feature space, the dimensionality of
the model, and the sample size. Four different cross-validation methods (single holdout, 10-fold, train-validation-test,
and  nested  10-fold)  were  compared  based  on  the  statistical  power  and  confidence  of  the  resulting  ML  models.
Distributions of the null and alternative hypotheses were used to determine the minimum required sample size for
obtaining a statistically significant outcome (5% significance) with 80% power. Statistical confidence of the model
was defined as the probability of correct features being selected for inclusion in the final model.

Results: ML models generated based on the single holdout method had very low statistical power and confidence,
leading to overestimation of classification accuracy. Conversely, the nested 10-fold cross-validation method resulted
in the highest statistical confidence and power, while also providing an unbiased estimate of accuracy. The required
sample size using the single holdout method could be 50% higher than what would be needed if nested k-fold cross-
validation were used. Statistical confidence in the model based on nested k-fold cross-validation was as much as four
times higher than the confidence obtained with the single holdout–based model. A computational model, MATLAB
code, and lookup tables are provided to assist researchers with estimating the minimum sample size needed during
study design.

Conclusion: The adoption of nested k-fold cross-validation is critical for unbiased and robust ML studies in the speech,
language, and hearing sciences.
Key Words: Clinical study design, Generalizable machine learning model, Power analysis

INTRODUCTION

Statistical analysis and methods are essential parts of the scientific discovery process, and they play important
roles during the design of an experiment, its execution, and its final analysis. For example, statistical power analysis
drives  the  decision  about  the  required  sample  size  during  experimental  design  (Cohen,  2013;  Jones  et  al.,  2003).
Additionally, inferential statistics allow for the study of a sample of a population whose findings can then generalize
to the larger population (Field et al., 2012; Lowry, 2014). Statistical machine learning (ML) is a group of statistical
tools and techniques that has gained a lot of attention in different branches of science, with particular application to
fields that are relevant to this journal’s audience, such as healthcare (Liu et al., 2019; Qayyum et al., 2020; Shen et
al.,  2021)  and  speech,  language,  and  hearing  sciences  (Oleson  et  al.,  2019).  ML  provides  many  advantages  over
conventional statistical analysis. For example, a single model can often incorporate features from different scales of
measurement (nominal, ordinal, interval, and ratio). Also, the ability of ML to capture complex, high-dimensional,
and non-linear interactions among different features can provide a significant advantage over conventional statistical
methods. ML  can be categorized into two main  groups: supervised and unsupervised  ML. In supervised  ML, true
labels  of  the  data  are  known  a  priori  (e.g.,  knowing  which  speech  samples  are  recorded  from  individuals  with
Parkinson’s disease or from neurotypical individuals). Supervised ML encompasses a wide variety of methods ranging
from  simple  logistic  regression  (Menard,  2002)  to  deep  learning  (Liu  et  al.,  2019)  and  ensemble  learning
(Ghasemzadeh, 2019b; Sagi & Rokach, 2018). In unsupervised ML, unlabeled data are used to discover underlying
structures and patterns of the data (e.g., doing the same study but not knowing which voice data came from individuals
with Parkinson’s disease) (Theodoridis & Koutroumbas, 2009).

Studies using supervised ML in healthcare (including speech, language, and hearing sciences) can be categorized
into two main groups depending on their aims: tool-developing and knowledge-developing. Tool-developing studies
primarily use ML to “create a tool” for performing a task automatically. On the other hand, knowledge-developing
studies (also referred to as ML-based science in the literature (Kapoor & Narayanan, 2022)) primarily use ML as a
robust  statistical  analysis  and  data  mining  tool  to  gain  knowledge  and/or  answer  research  questions  about  certain
phenomena.  Tool-developing  studies  closely  resemble  an  engineering  approach,  and  their  aims  could  vary  from
automated diagnosis and evaluation to segmentation of a signal of interest, to solving an inverse problem. Examples
of  using  ML  to  automatically  differentiate  healthy  individuals  from  those  with  disorders  (for  automated

screening/diagnosis and assessment of treatments) include the identification of voice disorders using voice samples
(Arjmandi  et  al.,  2011;  Arjmandi  &  Pooyan,  2012;  Ghasemzadeh  et  al.,  2015),  Parkinson’s  disease  using  speech
recordings  (Ghasemzadeh  et  al.,  2022;  Tsanas  et  al.,  2012),  amyolateral  sclerosis  using  speech  recordings
(Ghasemzadeh  &  Searl,  2018;  Vieira  et  al.,  2022),  septic  infants  from  the  audio  signal  produced  by  their  cry
(Matikolaie  &  Tadj,  2022),  abnormal  vocal  folds  from  laryngoscopic  images  (Cho  &  Choi,  2020),  intelligibility
assessment  of  aphasic  speech  (Le  et  al.,  2016),  swallowing  disorder  from  high-resolution  manometry  recordings
(Mielens  et  al.,  2012),  screening  for  autism  spectrum  disorder  (Crippa  et  al.,  2015;  Thabtah  &  Peebles,  2020),
predicting the hearing outcome in patients with sudden sensorineural hearing loss (Bing et al., 2018; Uhm et al., 2021),
and predicting language and communication skills of infants based on their speech-evoked electroencephalography
data (Wong et al., 2021). Studies that have utilized ML for segmentation applications include automated segmentation
of the glottis from high-speed videoendoscopy recordings (Kist et al., 2021), detection of high-speed videoendoscopy
frames with partial occlusion of the vocal folds (Yousef et al., 2022), tongue segmentation from ultrasound images
(Hamed Mozaffari & Lee, 2019), segmentation of videofluoroscopic recordings for swallowing studies (Donohue et
al., 2021), speech classification for improving the performance of hearing aids (Bhat et al., 2020), and identification
of the type of stuttering-related events from speech (Alharbi et al., 2020; Bayerl et al., 2022). Estimating parameters
of the phonatory system from acoustic signals (Gómez et al., 2018; Ibarra et al., 2021; Zhang, 2020), measuring the
distance between a laser-projection endoscope and the vocal folds (Ghasemzadeh et al., 2020), and compensating for
non-linear image distortion in fiberoptic endoscopes and performing calibrated mm-measurements in laryngeal images
(Ghasemzadeh et al., 2021) are some examples of solving an inverse problem in voice and speech science using ML.
On the other hand, in knowledge-developing studies, the main outcome is not the trained model itself, but rather
the knowledge that has been gained. One example from this category would be the application of ML for understanding
differences  in  phonatory  functions  between  vocally  healthy  individuals  and  patients  with  phonotraumatic  vocal
hyperfunction  using  ambulatory  recordings  (Ghassemi  et  al.,  2014;  Mehta  et  al.,  2015;  Van  Stan  et  al.,  2020),  or
differences between mild and moderate severity of phonotrauma  (Van Stan et al., 2023). Other examples would be
the quantification of the information lost in the perceptual evaluation of voice due to inherent limitations of the human
auditory  system  (Ghasemzadeh  &  Arjmandi,  2020),  comparison  between  the  information  content of  temporal  and
spectral  features  of  connected  speech  for  clinical  evaluation  of  voice  and  speech  (Ghasemzadeh  et  al.,  2022),  the
optimum number of sensors for encoding articulatory information from electromagnetic articulography recordings
(Wang et al., 2016), the effect of speech duration on classification uncertainty of persons with dementia (Ossewaarde
et al., 2020), quantification of articulatory distinctiveness of different vowels and consonants  (Wang et al., 2013),
evaluating the relevance of different features in predicting hearing loss  (Lenatti et al., 2022), and investigating the
predictive power of different items of the Infant Monitoring Questionnaire on language outcomes (Armstrong et al.,
2018).

The Problem of Overfitting in Machine Learning

Despite their growing popularity in the speech, language, and hearing sciences, ML models are susceptible to
overfitting,  which  refers  to  models  performing  very  well  on  one  dataset  but  poorly  on  similar,  but  independent,
datasets. One contributing factor to overfitting is that the decision boundary of a model is determined during a training
process, and the boundary could be complex, non-linear, and in a high-dimensional space on the training dataset. The
second  contributing  factor  could  be  due  to  improper  implementation  of  model  selection  or  hyperparameter
optimization components, which may lead to data leakage (Kapoor & Narayanan, 2022) and overestimation of model
performance.  Model  selection  refers  to  the process  of  choosing  the  best-performing  model  out  of  many  candidate
models. Feature selection is a common example of model selection in speech, language, and hearing sciences, which
determines the best subset of features or measures that yield the highest performance. Hyperparameter optimization
refers to the process of tunning parameters of an ML algorithm (e.g., parameters of a support vector machine) to get
the  maximum  performance.  Whereas  the  possibility  of  having  a  high-dimensional,  complex,  non-linear  decision
boundary  and  model  selection  account  for  many  of  the  primary  advantages  of  ML  over  conventional  statistical
analysis, they raise the possibility of overfitting.

Proper  utilization  of  an  ML  step  termed  cross-validation  can  both  alleviate  overfitting  (Hawkins,  2004)  and
estimate the generalizability of the trained model (Theodoridis & Koutroumbas, 2009). Cross-validation is a method
that uses some portion of the data called the training set for training the model and then evaluates the performance of
the  trained  model  on  the  remainder  of  the  data  called  the  testing  set.  Different  cross-validation  approaches  are
explained later in the Cross-validation methods section of the paper. Reviewing the existing literature that used ML
in  the  speech,  language,  and  hearing  sciences  showed  some  important  trends.  For  example,  many  of  these
investigations  have  employed  simple  cross-validation  techniques  only  containing  a  single  training  set  (see,  for
example, (Ibarra et al., 2021; Van Stan et al., 2020; Vieira et al., 2022; Yousef et al., 2022; Zhang, 2020)). Another

significant observation was the sample size. While very large public datasets (several thousand to several hundred
thousand samples) are available for machine vision  (Huang et al., 2008)  and speech processing (Panayotov et al.,
2015), studies from the speech, language, and hearing fields are associated with small sample sizes (often a few tens
of samples). Small sample sizes are especially susceptible to overfitting, with extra caution required for the proper
application  of  cross-validation.  This  is  especially  true  if  the  ML  processing  pipeline  includes  model  selection
components.

The problem of overestimation of ML performance in the presence of a model selection component has already
been  investigated  in  several  studies.  For  example,  two  recent  studies  have  reported  very  alarming  findings  in  the
application of ML in speech, language, and hearing literature (Berisha et al., 2021; Vabalas et al., 2019). A recent
study surveyed the literature on the  application of ML in autism and found a strong negative correlation between
sample  size  and  reported  accuracy  (Vabalas  et  al.,  2019).  Similar  findings  have  been  reported  on  speech-based
classifications of individuals with Alzheimer’s disease (Berisha et al., 2021) and for individuals with different forms
of cognitive impairments (Berisha et al., 2021). These observed trends are at odds with theoretical expectations and a
strong indication of widespread flawed evaluation of ML in the literature, indicating the possibility of a widespread
overfitting and overestimation of the performance. A recent study has described this situation as a “crisis in ML-based
science” (Kapoor & Narayanan, 2022) that was mainly attributed to data leakage, which often refers to the existence
of some overlap (sometimes very subtle) between training and testing sets and not having “truly” independent test
set(s). Application of cross-validation without a “true” test set in the presence of a model selection component is a
common culprit for data leakage. Prior studies have shown that cross-validations with independent test sets are robust
to overfitting and can provide an unbiased estimate of ML performance (Krstajic et al., 2014; Parvandeh et al., 2020;
Varoquaux et al., 2017). Simulated data based on Gaussian distributions have been used to study the effect of different
cross-validations in the presence of feature selection and model parameter optimization (Vabalas et al., 2019).

Power Analysis in Machine Learning

When evaluating different cross-validation methods to reduce overfitting,  prior literature has quantified their
effect on ML performance. However, power analysis of ML and the effect of different cross-validations on the required
sample size have not been addressed. For example, a recent meta-analysis of ML in medical imaging applications
found that, out of 167 papers, only four papers included some procedures for determining sample size (Balki et al.,
2019).  In  contrast,  power  analysis  before  conducting  a  study  is  a  common  practice  in  science  and  a  ubiquitous
component of grant applications to the National Institutes of Health. These highlight the importance of this missing
piece  in  knowledge-developing  ML  studies.  In  conventional  statistical  tests,  power  analysis  allows  researchers  to
estimate the minimum sample size required for achieving a target statistical power. This analysis is often done based
on effect sizes reported in the literature. However, with  ML, power analysis can be defined in multiple ways. This
study divides them into two broad categories: “the required sample size” and “the recommended sample size.” The
required sample size follows the conventional definition, and it is the “minimum” sample size required to have enough
statistical power to reject the null hypothesis. In contrast, the recommended sample size is based on reaching a target
performance for  the  ML  model.  A  common  target  performance  in  the  ML  community  has  been  the  ML  accuracy
reaching a plateau, after which only marginal improvement is observed for increasing the sample size beyond that
point (Figueroa et al., 2012).

A comprehensive review of the “recommended sample size” approach was presented in a recent study (Viering
& Loog, 2022). This definition of recommended sample size and the adopted methodology in Figueroa et al., 2012
and its referenced studies neglect the effect size reported in the literature, which is a significant source of information
and  a  very  powerful  aspect  of  power  analysis  in  conventional  statistical  analysis.  Also,  these  methods  are  more
appropriate for active learning paradigms (Figueroa et al., 2012), where ML performance gets evaluated continuously
as  batches  of  new  samples  are  added  to  the  dataset  (often  through  labeling  the  data  and  not  study  participant
recruitment), and hence not applicable to estimating the required sample size during the design of a study. The initial
recommended dataset for these methods is also very large (100 to 200 samples (Figueroa et al., 2012)), and the final
sample size could be much larger than this number. Such sample sizes are practical in tool-developing studies, where
often the data just need to be labeled. However, knowledge-developing studies involve experimental design and active
recruitment of participants, and such high sample sizes would often be impractical.

In summary, the prior sample size estimation studies were focused on the recommended sample size and not the
required sample size. Additionally, the prior works did not consider the effect of different cross-validations on the
sample size. The current study incorporates the traditional definition of power analysis into the ML framework. This
new approach would allow researchers to use the effect sizes reported in the literature for power analysis during the
design of an ML study. Finally, an alternative definition of recommended sample size based on the effect sizes reported
in the literature is presented in this study that relates to the optimality of feature selection and its ability to find the

correct subset of features. We will argue why this alternative definition of recommended sample size is important and
more relevant for knowledge-developing ML studies.

Study Aim and Research Questions

Optimization (determining the value of a parameter given a particular desired outcome) is an integral component
of ML models. Two different types of optimizations can be differentiated in the context of ML. First, determining the
optimum decision boundary between different classes which is part of the training process and, hence, present in any
ML  implementation.  Second,  model  selection  which  may  include  feature  selection,  hyperparameter  optimization,
optimization  of  the  architecture  of  a  (deep  or  shallow)  neural  network,  selecting  between  different  classification
algorithms, etc. The focus of this study is on ML implementations that also include a model selection component.
Also, we paid specific attention to feature selection in this study. However, the general findings should apply to other
model selection scenarios.

The main aim of this study was to show that the choice of cross-validation method has a profound impact on the
statistical power of ML and to provide a strong motivation for researchers in speech, language, and hearing sciences
and other disciplines to migrate from the commonly used single holdout and train-validation-test cross-validations to
more  robust  and  powerful  methods.  Specifically,  this  study  quantified  the  statistical  relationship  among  different
cross-validation methods, the minimum required sample size, the number of extracted features, the number of selected
features, and the discriminative power of selected features. The outcome of this study could be used to determine the
required  and  recommended  sample  sizes  of  an  ML  study during  its  experimental  design,  to  select  the  appropriate
dimensionality of the feature space for an existing dataset, and to help scientists with the proper implementation of
their ML processing pipeline to achieve generalizable ML models. Last but not least, the availability of power analysis
method for ML could lead to a wider application of ML in clinical science where researchers may have previously
thought  that  the  sample  sizes  for  their  studies  could  be  too  small  to  apply  ML.  To  pursue  this  aim,  four  research
questions were asked in this study.

Q1: How is the statistical power of an ML model affected by the employed cross-validation method?
Q2: How is the statistical confidence in an ML model affected by the employed cross-validation method?
Q3: What is the minimum required sample size to get a statistically significant outcome from an ML model with
conventional power requirements (5% significance, 80% power [α=0.05, 1-β=0.8])?
Q4: What is the recommended sample size for achieving a target statistical confidence of the final ML model?
This paper is organized as follows. First, the cross-validation methods that were investigated in this study are
presented. Then, the performance of ML on a clinical dataset is reported to demonstrate the profound effect of different
cross-validations on the statistical properties of the trained ML models. The implications of these differences and the
rationale  for  using  simulated  data  for  the  rest  of  the  paper  are  also  presented  in  this  section.  The  framework  for
generating  simulated  data  and  statistical  evaluation  of  ML  models  are  presented  next.  The  comparison  of  cross-
validation approaches using simulated data section is devoted to reporting the outcomes of three different experiments
designed  to  answer  the  four  research  questions.  Experiments  1  and  2  answer  research  questions  Q1  and  Q2,
respectively. Experiment 3 was conducted to answer research questions Q3 and Q4. The results of the experiments
are put into the larger context in the Discussion section, where more general implications of this work are presented,
along with limitations of this study, generalization of its findings, and directions for future studies.

CROSS-VALIDATION METHODS

Feature  selection  is  an  optimization  problem,  and  the  cost  function  (the  evaluation  metric  that  is  to  be
maximized)  is  the  accuracy  of  the  classifier  (Theodoridis  &  Koutroumbas,  2009).  However,  depending  on  which
cross-validation is implemented, the cost function is computed differently. Therefore, our main hypothesis was that
the  choice  of  cross-validation  would  significantly  affect  the  statistical  characteristics  (average  accuracy,  standard
deviation  (std)  accuracy,  and  confidence)  of  the  final,  optimized  ML  model.  Although  cross-validation  comes  in
several different flavors, they can be categorized into two main types: two-split and three-split cross-validations. In
the  two-split  methods,  the  dataset  is  divided  into  (a  series  of)  two  separate  partitions  of  training  and  testing  sets,
whereas  in  the  three-split  methods,  the  dataset  is  divided  into  (a  series  of)  three  separate  partitions  of  training,
validation,  and  testing  sets.  This  paper  compares  two  two-split  methods  and  two  three-split  methods  of  cross-
validation.

Single holdout method

The single holdout approach is a two-split method and the simplest cross-validation approach. In this approach,
based on a target splitting ratio, the dataset is randomly divided into two disjoint sets: a training set and a testing set.
The training set is used for  creating the model. The accuracy of the classifier is computed by applying the trained

model to the testing set. Therefore, the cost function of feature selection is the accuracy of the testing set. This means
the  feature  set  that  maximizes  the  testing  accuracy  will  be  selected  for  the  final, optimized  ML  model.  The  main
advantages of this approach are its implementation simplicity and low computational complexity. Figure 1(A) shows
a schematic of this approach. In this study, we used a stratified version of the single holdout cross-validation to ensure
that both training and testing sets had the same proportion of samples from each class, with a splitting ratio of 70%
(training) to 30% (testing).

k-fold cross-validation

The  k-fold  cross-validation  approach  is  also  a  two-split  method,  where  the  dataset  is  divided  randomly  and
evenly into k disjoint sets. Each set contains 2n/k samples (n is the sample size per each class) and is considered the
testing set for that fold. All the remaining samples constitute the training samples for that fold. Similar to the single
holdout,  the  training  set  from  each  fold  is  used  for  training  the  model,  and  then  that  model  is  applied  to  the
corresponding  testing  set  to  get  an  estimate  of  model  performance.  However,  in  contrast  with  the  single  holdout
method,  the  training/testing  process  is  performed  multiple  (k)  times.  The  cost  function  of  feature  selection  is  the
average accuracy over the k different testing sets. This means that the feature set that maximizes the average testing
accuracy will be selected for the final, optimized ML model.

The main advantages of this approach are that all samples contribute to the training and testing of the ML model,
and the robustness of model performance can be obtained by computing the std of the k testing accuracies. Figure 1(B)
shows a schematic of this approach with k = 3 folds for visualization purposes. In this study, we used stratified 10-
fold cross-validation. The selection of k = 10 was motivated by its common use in the literature and a recent study
supporting the suitability of this selection (Marcot & Hanea, 2021).

Train-validation-test cross-validation

The train-validation-test approach is a three-split method, where the dataset is first split into two disjoint sets
termed training-validation and testing sets.  The training-validation set is then further split into two disjoint sets of
training and validation sets using single holdout, k-fold cross-validation, or a different method. An ML model is trained
using the training set and is then applied to the associated validation set to obtain an estimate of model performance.
However, unlike the previous two-split methods, the cost function of feature selection is either validation accuracy (in
the case of single holdout) or average validation accuracy over multiple splits (in the case of k-fold cross-validation).
This means that the feature set that maximizes accuracy across validation set(s) will be selected for the final, optimized
model.  The  selected  features  are  then  used  to  train  the  final  model  using  both  training  and  validation  samples.
Critically, the final model is then applied to the testing samples to obtain a single value of model performance on a
disjoint testing set.

The main advantage of this approach is that the testing set is completely independent of the model optimization
process (i.e., feature selection in our case). Figure 1(C) shows a schematic of this approach with k = 3 folds within the
training-validation set for visualization purposes. In this study, we used a stratified version and reserved 15% of the
samples for the testing set. The remaining 85% of samples were divided into training and validation sets using 10-fold
cross-validation.

Nested k-fold cross-validation

The nested k-fold cross-validation approach is also a three-split method, and is, basically, a k-fold (inner) cross-
validation embedded inside another  k-fold (outer) cross-validation. The nested k-fold cross-validation method thus
consists of an outer k-fold cross-validation that divides the data into k different folds, with each outer fold consisting
of training-validation and testing sets. Each training-validation set undergoes a secondary (inner) k-fold data splitting
to create training and validation sets. In this sense, the testing sets of the outer folds represent multiple independent
testing sets, the testing sets of the inner folds are intermediate validation sets, and the training sets of the inner folds
are the training sets. This means that, unlike the previous three methods, feature selection will be executed k different
times (one per each outer fold) and hence we will have k different estimates for the best feature set. In each outer fold,
the feature set that maximizes the average accuracy over the  k different validation sets (one for each inner fold) is
selected  as  a  candidate  best  feature  set.  Also,  in  contrast with  the  previous  cross-validation  methods,  a  consensus
criterion  is  needed  to  select  the  best  feature  set  among  the  k  candidate  feature  sets  (one  from  each  outer  fold)
(Parvandeh et al., 2020). Figure 1(D) shows a schematic of nested k-fold cross-validation with three outer folds and
three inner folds per outer fold. In this study, we employed k = 10 and selected the feature set that had the highest
probability of joint occurrence among the k different best feature sets (one per outer fold).

Figure 1. Visualization of data splitting for the four cross-validation methods studied: (A) single holdout, (B) k-fold (k = 3), (C) train-validation-test,
(D) nested k-fold cross-validation (k = 3).

COMPARING CROSS-VALIDATION METHODS IN A REAL-WORLD CLINICAL EXAMPLE

The significant impact of different cross-validations is demonstrated here using ambulatory voice monitoring
data. A primary focus of our research group has been determining the real-world vocal behavior/function associated
with hyperfunctional voice disorders using ambulatory voice monitoring technology (Ghassemi et al., 2014; Mehta et
al., 2015; Van Stan et al., 2020). To that end, six different voice measures capturing different aspects of phonation
were  extracted from  the  ambulatory data  of  patients  with phonotraumatic  vocal hyperfunction  (PVH)  and  vocally
healthy  matched  controls.  The  extracted  measures  included  fundamental  frequency  (fo),  cepstral  peak  prominence
(CPP), sound pressure level (SPL), the difference between amplitudes of the first and second harmonics of the signal
(H1-H2),  smoothed  duration  of  phonatory  segments  (voicing  duration),  and  duration  of  non-phonatory  segments
(resting duration). The smoothed duration of phonatory segments was estimated from the outcome of the voice activity
detector by connecting  contiguous voiced segments that were  separated by half a second or less of non-phonatory
activity. No smoothing was applied to the durations of the non-phonatory segments. The methodology of processing
the ambulatory data and the definition of these measures have been reported in an earlier study (Mehta et al., 2015).
Similar to prior work (Ghassemi et al., 2014; Mehta et al., 2015; Van Stan et al., 2020), the day-long distribution of
each measure was constructed and eight different distributional characteristics (mean, median, std, interquartile range,
5th percentile, 95th percentile, skewness, and kurtosis) were extracted. The final classification features were computed
as  distributional  characteristics  of  each  participant,  averaged  over  all  recording  days,  meaning  each  participant
contributed only one data  point to the dataset. Therefore, the dimensionality of the  feature space  was 48 (6 voice
measures with 8 distributional characteristics). Our dataset included recordings from 153 females with PVH and 136
female controls. The dataset was balanced by selecting 136 patients randomly. To make the findings robust to the
random selection of patients and random splitting of the data, each analysis was repeated 500 times.

First,  the  average  and  std  of  testing  accuracy  for  different  numbers  of  selected  features  and  different  cross-
validation methods are presented in Figure 2(A). The results showed dissimilar trends for different cross-validation.
Specifically, two-split cross-validation methods (single holdout, 10-fold) yielded higher average accuracy compared
to the three-split cross-validation methods (train-validation-test, nested 10-fold), with single holdout tending to yield
the highest average accuracy for each number of selected features. Another significant observation was the impact of
different cross-validation methods on the variability of estimated testing accuracy. Specifically, testing accuracies of
the methods with a single testing set (single holdout, train-validation-test) were quite sensitive to the random splitting
of the data (larger error bars), whereas methods with multiple testing sets (10-fold, nested 10-fold) were quite robust
(smaller error bars). In summary, the selection of cross-validation method has a significant impact on the distributional
characteristics of the estimated performance of ML. The implications of these observations on the generalizability of
the findings and the statistical power of the model will be discussed at the end of this section.

Second, the effect of changing the sample size from 25 pairs to 125 pairs on the testing accuracy of the model
with four selected features was evaluated. Similar to the previous analysis, the participants were selected randomly,
and  each  analysis  was  repeated  500  times.  The  average  and  std  of  testing  accuracy  for different  sample  sizes  are
presented in Figure 2(B). Interestingly, the estimated performances of cross-validations with two splits (single holdout,
10-fold)  declined  as  the  sample  size  was  increased,  which  doesn’t  follow  the  theoretical  expectation.  Conversely,
testing accuracies of cross-validations with three splits (train-validation-test, nested 10-fold) increased as the sample
size was increased. The implications of these observations on the generalizability of the findings and the statistical
power of the model will be discussed at the end of this section.

Figure 2. (A): The effect of different cross-validations on average and std of testing accuracy for different numbers of selected features, (B): the
effect of sample size on testing accuracy estimated based on different cross-validations.

Third, as we discussed earlier, the knowledge that is gained (vs. the trained model itself) is the primary objective
of knowledge-developing ML studies. Looking at features that are selected and the orders in which they get selected
is an important source of acquiring such knowledge. For example, in this clinical case study  of ambulatory voice
monitoring, each of the six voice measures relates to a different aspect of phonation. The finding that a distributional
characteristic of H1-H2 is the best feature versus a distributional characteristic of fo would have different implications
regarding the etiology and/or compensatory behavior associated with PVH. To demonstrate  the effect of different
cross-validation methods on the outcome of feature selection, the probability of different features being selected at
different steps of feature selection was computed from the 500 repetitions of the first analysis of this section. In this
fashion, the first feature was the feature that provided the highest classification accuracy. The second feature was the
feature (among the remaining ones) that provided the highest improvement in classification accuracy. The third and
the fourth features were defined in a similar way.

Figure 3 shows the results. According to Figure 3(A), the outcome of feature selection for the single holdout
method was very unstable (low selection probabilities), meaning the outcome of feature selection was very sensitive
to how the data were split into training and testing sets. That is, depending on the samples that were in the training set,
different features (and even from different voice measures) were selected as the most informative (i.e., the highest
classification accuracy) descriptors of PVH, which indicates low generalizability for the trained model. The situation
for the train-validation-test method was better, where the first and second features were consistently selected (high
selection probabilities). However, the third and fourth features  had low selection probabilities. Lastly, 10-fold and
nested  10-fold  cross-validation  methods  produced  models  that  were  much  more  consistent,  with  the  highest
consistency of feature selection exhibited by nested 10-fold cross-validation.

Figure 3. A comparison of statistical confidence of four cross-validation methods: (A) single holdout, (B) 10-fold, (C) train-validation-test, (D)
nested 10-fold. The horizontal axes represent the 48 dimensions in the feature space (the 6 voice measures listed under the panels with 8
distributional characteristics per voice measure). Within each voice measure category on the plots, the distributional characteristics, in order, are
the mean, median, std, interquartile range, 5th percentile, 95th percentile, skewness, and kurtosis.

These three analyses showed the impact of different cross-validation methods on the ML outcomes, highlighting
the importance of employing appropriate cross-validation for ML in healthcare. Based on the result of Figure 2(A),
the average and std of the distribution of classification accuracy depended on how cross-validation was implemented.
Figure 2(B) showed that increasing the sample size had dissimilar effects on the distribution of the accuracy of the
classifier for different cross-validations. The statistical power of ML directly relates to the distribution of its accuracy;
therefore, we can expect different statistical power for different implementations of cross-validations. Now the first
question (research question Q1) is which method has the highest statistical power (and hence requires the smallest
sample size). To answer this question, we need to systematically change the discriminative power of features, the
sample size of the dataset, the dimensionality of feature space, etc. Also, we need to have thousands of independent
examples of each case so we  can generate  the distribution of the performance that is required for power analysis.
Therefore, simulated data were used for the rest of this paper.

Based on the results of Figure 3, the statistical confidence of the model varied significantly among the different
cross-validation methods. The next question (research question Q2) is which method gives us the correct answer. With
real data, we could not be sure which features are the most discriminative ones. Also, we cannot systematically change
the  discriminative  power  of  features,  the  sample  size  of  the  dataset,  the  dimensionality of  feature  space,  etc.,  and
determine the recommended sample size for meeting a target model confidence. In contrast, with simulated data, we
know the underlying distribution of each feature and, hence, which features should be selected. Also, we can change
the  parameters  of  the  problem  systematically.  As  a  final  note,  more  than  20  different  voice  measures  have  been
presented in prior ambulatory voice monitoring studies (Cortés et al., 2018; Mehta et al., 2015; Van Stan et al., 2020).
Additionally, up to 10 different distributional characteristics have been used in prior studies. This would add up to
more than 200 possible features. A practical follow-up question would be, how many features can be extracted for a
given  sample  size  to  have  statistical  confidence  in  the  findings?  The  following  simulation  study  will  present
methodologies to answer these important and practical questions.

STATISTICAL FRAMEWORK FOR MACHINE LEARNING MODEL EVALUATION

This study assumed a balanced two-class classification problem (e.g., detecting the presence of a disorder in an
equal number of patients and controls in a clinical application) with a sample size of 2n participants (n per class). A
feature selection component was also included in the ML processing pipeline. Therefore, this study assumed a total
of m independent computed features, of which only  l were discriminative. All analyses were executed on a server

running a Windows 2019 Server, with two Xenon Gold 6230 CPUs, and 768 GB of RAM. We used MATLAB R2021b
for our analyses.

Table 1. Definition of symbols and parameters used in this study.

Symbols  Definition
H0
Ha
α
β
𝒩𝑚
P
N
𝝁P
𝚺P
𝐈𝑚
m
n
l
D
k
𝐶𝑙,𝑑
𝜃𝑖
r
p
nr
𝛾𝐷𝑏
𝛾𝐷

The null hypothesis
The alternative hypothesis
Probability of type I error
Probability of type II error (1−β is called power)
m-dimensional Gaussian distribution
Samples from the positive class
Samples from the negative class
An m×1 vector of means of 𝒩𝑚 for positive samples
An m×m matrix storing the covariance of 𝒩𝑚 for positive samples
Identity matrix with the size of m×m
The dimensionality of the feature space
Sample size per each class in a balanced dataset
The number of discriminative (i.e., selected) features
Cohen’s D effect size of discriminative features
The number of folds in k-fold and nested k-fold cross-validation
Statistical confidence of the model (the probability of correct selection of d features out of l)
Parameters of fitted exponential curves
Linear correlation coefficient
p-value
The required sample size to get a statistically significant outcome with conventional power requirements (α=0.05, 1-β=0.8)
The ratio of the number of positive to the number of negative samples in an unbalanced dataset
The ratio of the larger Cohen’s D to the smaller one if selected features had different discriminative powers.

Given the aims of this study, features of positive (e.g., patient group) and negative (e.g., healthy control group)
classes  were  generated  from  a  series  of  multivariate  Gaussian  distributions.  Additionally,  to  make  the  simulation
tractable, we assumed all discriminative features to have the same discriminatory power of D (Cohen’s D effect size
metric (Cohen, 2013)). Let 𝒩𝑚 denotes an m-dimensional Gaussian distribution with 𝝁P (𝝁N) being an m×1 vector of
means and 𝚺P (𝚺N) being an m×m matrix storing the covariance of the positive (negative) samples, where m is the
number of features extracted. Equations 1 and 2 show the formula for data generation, where  𝑿P and 𝑿N are n×m
matrices storing n samples from the positive class and n samples from the negative class, respectively.
𝑿P~𝒩𝑚(𝝁P,  𝚺P)
(1)
𝑿N~𝒩𝑚(𝝁N,  𝚺N)
(2)
For the negative class, we set 𝝁N = [0, 0, … , 0]𝑇, and for the positive class we used 𝝁P = [𝐷, … , 𝐷, 0, … , 0]𝑇, with the
first l elements of 𝝁P equal to D and the remaining m−l elements equal to 0. Additionally, we used  𝚺N = 𝚺P = 𝐈𝑚,
where 𝐈𝑚 is an identity matrix with the size of m×m.

Comparing the definition of the 𝑿P and 𝑿N shows that only the first l features of the positive and negative classes
had different distributions and hence were discriminative, and the remaining m−l features were irrelevant. The goal is
then to find those l features and then train a classifier on them. This goal is an optimization problem and can be broken
into two separate components: (1) selecting a proper cost function and (2) adopting a strategy for searching the solution
space.  This  study  adopted  a  wrapper-forward  feature  selection  method  due  to  its  high  performance  and  low
computational cost (Ghasemzadeh, 2019a). The cost function of a wrapper method is the performance of a classifier.
This  means  the  subset  of  features  that  maximizes  the  classification  performance  gets  selected.  Forward  feature
selection refers to the search strategy. It is an iterative greedy search algorithm that starts with an empty selected set.
At each stage, the remaining features are sequentially added to the selected set. The feature that leads to the maximum
improvement of the cost function is added to the selected set. The process is repeated until the addition of new features
doesn’t improve the cost function. Finally, logistic regression was used as the classifier. This was primarily motivated
by  its  widespread  usage  in  speech,  language,  and  hearing  sciences,  the  simplicity  of  its  algorithm  that  offers
interpretability  and  produces  a  closed-form  model,  and  the  underlying  distributions  of  the  positive  and  negative
classes. Specifically, the positive and negative samples were generated based on multivariate Gaussian distributions
with the same covariance but different means; therefore, the true decision boundary should be a hyperplane. Logistic

regression  implements  such  a  decision  boundary  and  hence  would  be optimal  for  our  problem.  See  Table 1  for a
summary of symbols and parameters used in this study.

Statistical evaluation criteria

To answer Q1 and Q3, the null (H0) and alternative (Ha) hypotheses need to be formed.  There is an implicit
assumption in the application of supervised ML that the extracted features have better discriminative power compared
to random features. This assumption can be used to formulate H0 and Ha for a supervised ML problem.

Ha: Extracted features will perform significantly better than random features.

To formally test this directional hypothesis, we need to construct the distributions of Ha (i.e., the performance of the
extracted features)  and  H0 (i.e., the performance of random features).  For this study, the distribution of  Ha can be
estimated using Monte Carlo simulations by generating a series of 𝑿P (Eq. 1) and 𝑿N (Eq. 2) and passing them through
our ML processing pipelines. The distribution of H0 can be estimated similarly by setting D = 0. Once distributions of
H0 and  Ha  are  estimated,  they  can  be  used  for  quantitative  evaluations  of different  ML processing  pipelines  (e.g.,
different cross-validation approaches). This study has used the following evaluation criteria.

Distributional characteristics of H0

The  distributional  characteristics  (mean,  std,  confidence  interval)  of  H0  are  evaluation  criteria  that  provide
valuable insights into the statistical properties of different ML processing pipelines. For example, the mean accuracy
of H0 for a balanced two-class problem should be 0.5 (on a scale of 0 to 1), and any gain over that number is often
interpreted as the discriminative power of the extracted features. This interpretation is based on an implicit assumption
that the implemented ML processing pipeline is not biased. The distribution of H0 would allow us to evaluate if such
a bias exists and then quantify it. Additionally, based on a specific statistical significance level (α), we can find the
confidence interval (CI) of H0. Investigating Ha shows that the alternative hypothesis is directional. Therefore, the CI
of H0 would be the range of values covering the minimum of the H0 distribution to its (1−α)×100 percentile. Assuming
a normal distribution, the mean and variance of H0 contribute to its CI; therefore, the std of the H0 distribution was
another evaluation criterion for comparing different cross-validation approaches.

Statistical power and the required sample size

Statistical power is the probability of a test producing true positive results, i.e., the probability of detecting the
presence of an effect if effect exists (Field et al., 2012). The distribution of Ha and the target probability of type II
error (β) are the factors determining the power of a test, where power is defined as 1−β. Statistical power is closely
related to the required sample size for a study to detect a significant effect with a reasonable probability. The required
sample size depends on the H0 and Ha distributions and the selected values for α and β. To determine the required
sample size for different cross-validation approaches, the distributions of Ha and H0 were estimated for different values
of n (Eqs. 1 and 2). Then, for a given value of α, the upper bounds of the H0 CI, and, for a given value of β, the lower
bounds of the Ha CI were estimated and plotted. The point of intersection between the two plots corresponds to the
minimum required sample size. Figure 4 illustrates this for the commonly used values of α = 0.05 and β = 0.2 (power
of 0.8), which were used throughout this study.

Figure 4. Empirical estimation of the minimum required sample size as the value of n at the intersection between the upper bound of the H0
confidence interval (given α = 0.05) and lower bound of the Ha confidence interval (given β = 0.2).

Statistical confidence

ML is a statistical tool, and hence, there is a chance that the outcome of an ML model provides incorrect results.
Such inaccuracies are often quantified using performance metrics such as accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity. While
it is well understood that the classifier outcome could be incorrect, the correctness of the model itself has received less
attention. The correctness of the model can be defined in terms of the features that have been included (i.e., selected)
in the model, as well as the coefficients (e.g., feature weights) of the model. The focus of this study is on the correctness
of selected features.

Statistical confidence of an ML model is defined as the probability that correct features were selected and hence
included in the ML model. In practice, statistical confidence is the probability of correct features being included in
the  final  model  if  we  repeat  our  experiment  many  times  with  different  samples  drawn  from  the  population.  This
concept is especially important as it will have direct consequences on the interpretation that we make about models
and the knowledge that we gain from them. As an example, let us consider the application of ML for understanding
differences in vocal function and behavior between patients with a voice disorder and vocally healthy individuals.
Depending on which features are being selected, we may attribute and rank different aspects of vocal function and/or
behavior  as  the  most  likely  contributors  to  causing  and/or  maintaining  the  disorder.  Now,  if  the  model  has  low
confidence and other researchers try to replicate the study, there is a high probability that they will find very different
results. This means, our conclusions about factors associated  with the disorder could be unreliable, and, hence, we
may  target  incorrect (or  at  least  suboptimal)  aspects  of phonation during  efforts  to  prevent  and  treat  the  disorder.
Statistical confidence is a metric that measures such an attribute. Referring to the definition of 𝑿P and 𝑿N (Eqs. 1,2),
we know which features should be included in the final mode, hence, the effect of different parameters and cross-
validation approaches on the statistical confidence of the model can be quantified. The symbol 𝐶𝑙,𝑑 will be used to
represent the statistical confidence of the model for different numbers of selected features. Specifically,  𝐶𝑙,𝑑 is the
probability that, among the l selected features in an ML model, d of the features were correctly selected.

COMPARISON OF CROSS-VALIDATION APPROACHES USING SIMULATED DATA
Experiment 1: Distributional characteristics of H0 and statistical power

Experiment 1 addressed research question Q1 (“How is the statistical power of an ML model affected by the
employed  cross-validation  method?”)  by  investigating  the  effect  of  different  parameters  on  obtaining  statistically
significant outcomes from a supervised ML model. First, the effects of the four cross-validation methods and different
sample sizes on the distribution of H0 were investigated. Values of m = 20 (20 extracted features), l = 2 (2 selected
features),  and  D = 0  were  used.  Figure  5  shows  the  results  of  running  each  experiment  5000  times,  with  each
experiment defined by a given cross-validation method and sample size per class (50 to 500 samples, in increments
of 50). The plots show the outcome of fitting a series of two-term exponential functions on the result of each cross-
validation. The form of the exponential function was:
𝑦 = 𝜃1𝑒𝜃2𝑥 + 𝜃3𝑒𝜃4𝑥,
(3)
where  𝑥  and  𝑦  are  the  predictor  and  outcome  variables,  respectively,  and  𝜃1, 𝜃2, 𝜃3, 𝜃4  are  parameters  of  the
exponential function.

In Figure  5(A), the mean  accuracies of  the  single holdout and 10-fold cross-validations significantly deviate
from the theoretically expected value of 0.5 for a balanced binary classification with irrelevant (non-discriminative)
features. However, as the sample size increases, the mean accuracies of these two approaches start to converge toward
the expected chance value of 0.5, indicating the accuracy that we saw at smaller sample sizes was due to overfitting
and not learning the underlying patterns of the data (as there are no patterns for H0). On the other hand, the average
accuracies  of  the  other  two  methods  are  quite  close  to  the  expected  value  of  0.5,  even  for  small  sample  sizes.
Comparing the mean of H0 accuracy among different cross-validations clearly shows that the lack of an independent
test set in the presence of an optimization task (e.g., feature selection, hyperparameter optimization, selection of the
architecture of a neural network, etc.) leads to significant overestimation of the performance and should be avoided.
The whiskers of Figure 5(A) depict the standard deviation of the accuracy of different approaches across the
5000  experimental  trials.  The  most  significant  observations  are  that  the  train-validation-test  and  10-fold  cross-
validation methods had the highest and the lowest standard deviations, respectively. Also, we see a significant decrease
in the value of dispersion as we move from the simple train-validation-test to the more sophisticated method of nested
10-fold cross-validation. Finally, the upper bound of the H0 CI (one-sided, α = 0.05) depends on both the mean and
the dispersion of the H0 distribution. Theoretically speaking, the upper bound increases with increases in the mean and
dispersion of the H0 distribution. This is also reflected in Figure 5(B). Based on this figure, for all approaches, the
upper  bound  of  H0  decreases  monotonically  with  an  increase  in  the  sample  size.  However,  we  see  significant
differences among the approaches, especially in lower sample sizes. For example, with 50 pairs, the single holdout
method has a significant chance (more than 5%) to get accuracies as high as 76.7% even if the features are irrelevant
(i.e., random features). However, this value drops to 62% if nested 10-fold cross-validation is used instead.

Figure 5. H0 characteristics: (A) mean and standard deviation of H0 accuracy (B) upper bound of H0 CI (one-sided, α = 0.05).

Second, the interaction effect between the dimensionality of the feature space (m) and different cross-validation
methods was investigated. Figure 6 shows the results. Based on Figure 6(A), the bias (the deviation from the expected
theoretical mean accuracy of 0.5) for single holdout and 10-fold cross-validation increases significantly as the number
of extracted features increases, whereas methods with independent test sets (train-validation-test and nested k-fold)
remain unbiased. Figure 6(B) represents the dependency of the upper bound of H0 CI. Based on this figure, the upper
bound of H0 CI increases with the number of extracted features for the single holdout and 10-fold cross-validations,
whereas this upper bound remains relatively constant for the methods with independent test sets.

Figure 6. Effect of dimension of the feature space (m) on (A) mean H0 accuracy and (B) upper bound of H0 CI (one-sided, α = 0.05).

Finally,  the  statistical  powers  of  the  different  cross-validation  methods  were  compared.  To  that  end,  the
minimum required sample size for a study to detect a statistically significant effect (α = 0.05) with typical statistical
power (1−β = 0.8) was determined for each experimental condition. Figure 7 shows the results, where the markers are
the outcome accuracies of the experiments, and the curves are polynomials of order 2 fitted on them. The portions of
the figures that fall below the dashed black line correspond to underpowered cases. The results indicate that the train-
validation-test and the single holdout methods have the lowest statistical power. For example, the train-validation-test
method (Figure 7C) with 50 pairs of samples would be underpowered (it’s below the dashed black line, meaning 1−β
< 0.8) even with two highly discriminative features (D = 1) in our 20-dimensional feature space. The situation for the
single holdout method (Figure 7A) is slightly better. A different interpretation of the results would be, if we have two
relatively good features with D = 0.6 in our 20-dimensional feature space, the train-validation-test needs at least 200
pairs  of  samples  for  having  an  80%  chance  of  getting  a  significant  outcome,  whereas  the  nested  10-fold  method
(Figure 7D)  only needs  100  pairs  of  samples.  Finally,  the  10-fold  cross-validation  (Figure 7B)  has  slightly  higher
statistical power compared to the nested 10-fold method. The most likely reason for this observation would be the fact

that nested k-fold uses fewer samples during the training and feature selection (in our case, 90%), whereas 10-fold
cross-validation takes advantage of all the data.

Figure 7. Comparison of the statistical power of the four cross-validation methods given varying simulated effect sizes and sample sizes. The
portions of the figures that fall below the dashed black line correspond to underpowered cases: (A) single holdout, (B) 10-fold, (C) train-
validation-test, (D) nested 10-fold.

Experiment 2: Statistical confidence of the model

Experiment 2 addressed research question Q2 (“How is the statistical confidence in an ML model affected by
the  employed  cross-validation  method?”)  by  investigating  the  effect  of  different  parameters  on  the  statistical
confidence of the final trained model. First, the effects of different cross-validation methods and sample sizes were
investigated.  Values  of  m = 20  (20  extracted  features)  and D = 0.8  were used.  The  generated  feature  set  was  then
passed through feature  selections with different cross-validations, and the two most discriminative  features (l = 2)
were determined. Each simulation was repeated 5000 times, and then the probability of finding the correct features
was computed.

Figure 8(A) shows the probability of at least one of the selected features being correct (𝐶2,1), and 8(B) represents
the probability of both selected features being correct (𝐶2,2). Based on these figures, models generated based on single
holdout  and  nested  10-fold  cross-validations  had  the  lowest  and  highest  statistical  confidence,  respectively.  For
example, the probability of both features being correct with 100 pairs is only about 20% with the single holdout (i.e.,
there is an 80% chance that the final model is based on at least one incorrect feature). However, this number increases
to about 80% in nested 10-fold cross-validation. Additionally, comparing Figures 8(A) and 8(B) shows that the gap
between the two methods increases as we aim for a correct multi-dimensional model (here the dimension of two). The
nested 10-fold method has a slightly better performance compared to the 10-fold cross-validation method. This could
be attributed to the voting mechanism described in the Cross-validation methods section for aggregating the outcomes
of  feature  selection from different  outer folds.  Finally, the plots exhibit a saturation phenomenon, indicating there
could be a “sweet spot” in terms of the recommended sample size required for getting a robust outcome.

Figure 8. Effect of different cross-validation methods on the statistical confidence of the trained model: (A) 𝐶2,1, (B) 𝐶2,2

Next, the interaction effect between the dimensionality of the feature space (m) and cross-validation methods on
the statistical confidence of the model was investigated. For this analysis, the value of D = 0.8 was used, and each
simulation was repeated 5000 times. Figure 9(A) shows the probability of at least one of the selected features being
correct (𝐶2,1), and Figure 9 (B) represents the probability of both selected features being correct (𝐶2,2). Based on these
figures, the dimensionality of the feature space (m) and statistical confidence of the model are inversely related to each
other.  However,  different  cross-validation  methods  exhibit  dissimilar  behaviors.  Specifically,  whereas  the  single
holdout is very sensitive to the dimensionality of the feature space, nested 10-fold  cross-validation  is very robust.
Finally,  there  is  an  interaction  effect  between  the  sample  size  and  the  dimensionality  of  the  feature  space  on  the
statistical confidence of the model. For example, if we have 100 pairs of samples and increase m from 5 to 40, 𝐶2,2
drops from 91% to 73% in nested 10-fold. However, if we increase the sample size to 200 pairs, we will only see a
decrease of 4% in statistical confidence. This result indicates that, for a feature with a target effect size (D), there
could be a “sweet spot” in terms of the recommended sample size required for statistical confidence to become robust
to an increase in the dimensionality of the feature space.

Figure 9. Effect of dimensionality of the feature space (m) on statistical confidence of the trained model: (A) 𝐶2,1, (B) 𝐶2,2

Experiment 3: Statistical characteristics of nested k-fold cross-validation

Experiments 1 and 2 showed that nested k-fold cross-validation offers the best statistical power and statistical
confidence of the model among the investigated methods. Experiment 3 addressed research questions Q3 and Q4 by
quantifying the statistical properties of nested 10-fold cross-validation and providing models that would enable future
studies  to  estimate  the  required  and  recommended  sample  sizes  in  the  design  phase  of  the  study.  Given  the
computational  cost  of  running  nested  k-fold  and  the  number  of  required  analyses  for  this  experiment,  each  set  of
parameters was simulated 2000 times.

Based  on  Figure  6(B),  the  95th  percentile  of  H0 for  nested  k-fold  cross-validation  was  found  to be  relatively
independent  of  the  dimensionality  of  the  feature  space  (m).  We  formally  tested  to  see  if  the  number  of  extracted
features (m) and the number of selected features (l) had significant effects on the H0 CI. To that end, a two-way analysis
of variance (ANOVA) in a 4×3 design was used with independent variables m ∈ [10, 20, 30, 40] and l ∈ [2, 3, 4]. The

dependent variable was the upper bound  of H0 CI (one-sided, α = 0.05). Table 2 presents the result, which did not
show statistically significant effects of m and l on the upper bound of H0 CI, confirming the robustness of the upper
bound of H0 CI in nested k-fold cross-validation to m and l.

Table 2. Results of two-way 4×3 analysis of variance on the upper bound of the H0 confidence interval.

Predictor

Main effect: Feature space dimensionality (m ∈ [10, 20, 30, 40])
Main effect: Number of selected features (l ∈ [2, 3, 4])
Interaction effect

Sum
of squares
0.0017
0.0042
0.0093

df  Mean
square
0.0006
0.0021
0.0016

3
2
6

F

p

0.51
1.87
1.37

0.67
0.15
0.22

significant  effect

Next, the minimum required number of pairs (nr) for a study using nested 10-fold cross-validation to detect a
statistically
for  𝐷 ∈
[0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1], 𝑚 ∈ [10, 20, 30, 40], 𝑙 ∈ [2, 3, 4]. Figure 10 shows the results, which indicate that n is
inversely related to D and l, and directly related to m, with D being the most influential factor. This means the function
for estimating nr must integrate all three predictors.

(1−β = 0.8)  was  computed

(α = 0.05)  with

typical  power

Figure 10. Effect of the size of the feature space (m), the number of discriminative features (l), and effect size (D) on the required number of pairs
(nr) for nested 10-fold cross-validation: (A) l = 2, (B) l = 3, (C) l = 4.

To derive a closed-form equation for estimating nr, for each pair of m and l, a power curve with the general form
of 𝑎𝑥𝑏 + 𝑐 was used to estimate the value of nr from D. This resulted in 12 different curves. Then, the parameters of
those curves (a, b, and c) were estimated from m and l based on three separate flat planes (one per parameter). Let D0,
m0, and l0 denote the target parameters of a study for which we want to estimate the minimum required number of
pairs (α = 0.05, 1−β = 0.8). Equations 4–7 show the process:
𝑎 =     39.37 − 6.718𝑙0 + 0.263𝑚0
𝑏 = −1.985 − 0.023𝑙0 + 0.001𝑚0
𝑐 = −0.886 + 1.507𝑙0 − 0.015𝑚0
𝑛𝑟 = 𝑎𝐷0
The goodness of fit was evaluated using root-mean-square error (RMSE) and mean percent magnitude error (MPE).
MPE was defined as the magnitude of the error divided by the true value expressed in percentage averaged over all
testing instances . Using Equations 4–7 with the training samples (resubstitution error rate) resulted in the RMSE of
3.35 and MPE of 2.98%. That is the expected magnitude error of using equations 4–7 for estimating the number of
required pairs (nr) was less than 3% on the training set.

(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

𝑏 + 𝑐

An independent test set was generated for the following sets of parameters: 𝐷 ∈ [0.55, 0.75, 0.95, 1.2, 1.4], 𝑚 ∈
[20, 30, 40], and 𝑙 ∈ [2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Our preliminary analysis showed the value of MPE over all test samples was 11.6%,
which is substantially higher than the training MPE. Therefore, further investigation was carried out to find the source
of the difference. Our investigation showed correlation between MPE and the number of extracted features (i.e., m)
was non-significant (p = 0.13). Similarly, correlation between MPE and discriminatory power of the features (i.e., D)
was non-significant (p = 0.63). In contrast, MPE was highly correlated with the number of selected features (R = 0.82,
p < 0.0001). Our further investigation showed that the value of MPE was quite different among the cases where 𝑙 ∈
[2, 3, 4] and 𝑙 ∈ [5, 6]. Going back to Experiment 3, Equations 4–7 were trained based on data points with 𝑙 ∈ [2, 3, 4].
Therefore,  the  test  samples  with  𝑙 ∈ [2, 3, 4]  correspond  to  interpolation,  whereas  the  test  samples  with  𝑙 ∈ [5, 6]

correspond to extrapolation cases. The interpolation cases (45 data points) had an MPE of 3.5%, which is quite close
to the MPE over the training samples, and also had a non-significant correlation coefficient (p = 0.19). However, the
MPE for extrapolation cases (30 data points) was 23.9%, with a high correlation (r = 0.73, p < 0.00001). In summary,
Equations 4–7 are very reliable for estimating the required sample size for 𝑙 ∈ [2, 3, 4], but the results become less
reliable as we start to use them for extrapolating into models with higher dimensions (𝑙 ≥ 5).

The statistical confidence of the final model (𝐶2,2, that is, the probability of both selected features being correct)
using  nested  10-fold  cross-validation  was  computed
for  different  numbers  of  pairs  and  𝐷 ∈
[0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1], 𝑚 ∈ [10, 20, 30, 40], 𝑙 = 2.  The  results  are  presented  in  appendix  Tables  A1  and  A2
with selected cases (𝐷 ∈ [0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1], 𝑚  =  10, 𝑙 = 2) plotted in Figure 11.

Finally, the recommended sample size in terms of the number of pairs (n) for achieving a target confidence for
the final model (𝐶2,2) can be obtained from Tables A1 and A2 in conjunction with linear interpolations. For example,
if we have two relatively good features with D = 0.6 in our 10-dimensional feature space, and we want to reach the
confidence of 95%, we need to have about 215 pairs of samples. However, to achieve the same confidence with 40
extracted features, 342 pairs of samples need to be used.

Figure 11. Effect of D and n on the confidence of the model generated using nested 10-fold cross-validation when m = 10.

DISCUSSION

This study was primarily motivated by the observation that many ML-based studies in speech, language, and
hearing sciences have adopted cross-validation methods with a single test set (i.e., single holdout or train-validation-
test  cross-validation  approaches).  Our  initial  investigation  using  real  clinical  data  showed  a  profound  impact  of
employed  cross-validation  on  the  estimated  accuracy  and  its  dispersion,  and  the  stability  of  the  feature  selection
outcome.  Therefore,  our  main  hypothesis  was  that  the  statistical  properties  of  the  final  trained  model  would  be
significantly affected by which cross-validation method was used, especially at smaller sample sizes (less than a few
hundred) that are the most likely scenarios in these fields.

Three experiments were conducted to quantify the impact of different cross-validation methods on the statistical
properties of the final trained models and to provide methods that would enable future studies to estimate the required
and recommended sample sizes during the design phase based on the most robust cross-validation method that was
evaluated  in  the  current  investigation  (nested  k-fold  cross-validation).  Table  3 presents  a  summary  comparing  the
statistical properties of the four cross-validation approaches studied. We would like to emphasize that the three factors
of bias (H0 mean accuracy), statistical power, and statistical confidence need to be considered simultaneously. For
example, while 10-fold cross-validation has the highest power, its estimated accuracy (if the ML processing pipeline
contains a model selection component) is biased, and hence should not be used. Conversely, despite the fact that train-
validation-test  method  gives an  unbiased  estimate  of  the  performance,  the  method  has  very  low  statistical  power,
meaning the distribution of H0 and Ha have a lot of overlap. Therefore, there is a significant probability for random
features to produce high classification accuracies with train-validation-test method (please refer to Figure 5(A) and
Figure 7). It is hoped that the results of this work will provide strong motivation for researchers to move away from
single holdout and train-validation-test cross-validation approaches and instead consider using the unbiased and more
robust nested k-fold cross-validation method in future studies.

Table 3. A summary comparing the four cross-validation methods studied. Desirable model characteristics are marked with bold face letters.

Method

H0 mean
accuracy

H0 std
accuracy

Highest
bias

Low

Robustness
to large
feature
space
Lowest

Statistical
power

Statistical
confidence

Required
sample
size

Recommended
sample size

Computational
time

Low

Lowest

High

Highest

Lowest

High bias  Lowest

High

Highest

High

Lowest

Low

Unbiased  Highest

Moderate

Lowest

Moderate

Highest

Moderate

Low

Low

Single
holdout

k-fold

Train-
validation-
test

Nested k-fold  Unbiased  Moderate  Highest

High

Highest

Low

Lowest

Highest

Q1: How is the statistical power of an ML model affected by the employed cross-validation method?

Experiment  1 answered this question by comparing the distribution of the null hypothesis  H0 (i.e., when the
features  were  irrelevant)  and  alternative  hypothesis  Ha  (when  some  of  the  features  were  discriminative)  for  four
different cross-validation methods. Results showed that the widely used single holdout method has significant bias
(Figure 5(A)) and therefore can significantly overestimate the true performance; at the same time, single holdout cross-
validation leads to an H0 with a very heavy tail (Figure 5(B)). This means that, even if the features are truly random
(irrelevant features), there is a good chance for the single holdout method to produce a high level of accuracy. On the
other hand, not only does nested k-fold cross-validation give an unbiased estimate of the performance (Figure 5(A)),
but also its H0 distribution has a thinner higher tail (Figure 5(B)). This means that the probability of getting a very
high accuracy from irrelevant features from nested k-fold cross-validation is much lower than the single holdout cross-
validation.

Another advantage of nested  k-fold  cross-validation is higher robustness to the dimensionality of the feature
space. This means that the probability of getting high accuracy from irrelevant features increases with an increase in
the number of extracted features if the single holdout method is used; in contrast, increasing the number of features
does not artificially increase accuracy if nested k-fold cross-validation is used (Figure 6(B)). Considering that most
ML-based studies are exploratory in nature, they often start with a relatively high number of features, and, therefore,
using a method that is less affected by the number of extracted features is quite desirable.

The results of Experiment 1 also demonstrated that robust statistical results could be obtained with significantly
smaller required sample sizes when using nested k-fold cross-validation as compared to the single holdout ot train-
validation-test methods (Figure 7). Considering that data collection is usually the most costly part of a clinical study
in  terms  of  time  and  expense,  a  significant  reduction  in  the  required  sample  size  could  increase  the  likelihood  of
carrying out a study that may have previously been deemed impractical or too costly. This reduction of the required
sample size of course comes at the expense of increased computational complexity of the nested k-fold cross-validation
method. However, the availability of fast computers and high-performance computing resources reduces this concern,
and the trade-off is quite favorable.

Q2: How is the statistical confidence in an ML model affected by the employed cross-validation method?

Statistical confidence of the model was defined as the probability of correct features being selected and, hence,
contributing to the classification outcome. Experiment 2 answered research question Q2 by quantifying the effect of
the  four  cross-validation  methods  on  the  statistical  confidence  of  the  model.  Based  on  Figure  8,  the  statistical
confidence of the model based on nested k-fold cross-validation could be as much as 4 times higher than the confidence
associated with the model based on single holdout cross-validation. The other important finding was the dissimilar
behavior of statistical confidence of the model when the number of extracted features increases. Based on Figure 9(B)
not only does the nested k-fold cross-validation lead to significantly higher confidence in the model, but it is also more
robust  than  the  other  methods  to  the  dimensionality  of  the  feature  space.  Therefore,  whereas  we  need  to be  extra
cautious and extract “as few” features as possible when employing single holdout cross-validation, we could relax this
requirement  and  extract  more  features  with  nested  k-fold  cross-validation.  In  practice,  this  relaxation  could
significantly increase the chance of finding more powerful and discriminative features. These important characteristics
should provide further motivation for shifting from the single holdout method to nested k-fold cross-validation.

Based  on  the  results  of  Experiments  1  and  2,  the  nested  k-fold  cross-validation  method  exhibited  the  best
performance,  followed  by  the  10-fold  cross-validation  method.  Train-validation-test  cross-validation,  which  is  a
popular method in the machine learning community due to its unbiased estimate of  accuracy (see Figure 5(A)) and

the  simplicity  of  its  implementation,  had  the  lowest  statistical  power  (Figure  7)  and  needed  even  more  samples
compared to the single holdout method. However, the statistical confidence of the model generated based on the train-
validation-test was much higher than the single holdout method (Figure 8). This higher confidence is attributed to our
implementation of train-validation-test cross-validation. Specifically, the train-validation part was split using 10-fold
cross-validation in our implementation, and, based on Figure 8, employing 10-fold cross-validation leads to models
with  high  statistical  confidence.  Then,  the  inferior  statistical  confidence  of  the  model  in  the  train-validation-test
compared  to  the  10-fold  cross-validation  is  attributed  to  the  fact  that  the  train-validation-test  method  only  uses  a
portion of data for feature selection (85% in our implementation). However, if the train-validation part was split using
a single holdout method (which in fact is very common in practice), the statistical confidence of the model based on
the  train-validation-test  would  have  been  lower  than  the  statistical  confidence  of  the  single  holdout  method.  In
summary,  the  findings  of  this  study  advise  against  any  application  of  single  holdout  and  train-validation-test
altogether.

Q3: What is the minimum required sample size to get a statistically significant outcome from an ML model
with conventional power requirements (5% significance, 80% power [α=0.05, 1-β=0.8])?

Experiment 3 was devoted to answering research questions Q3 and Q4 for a model employing nested 10-fold
cross-validation, which was the method with the best statistical properties. This model was described in Equations 4–
7.  The  discriminative  power of  selected  features  (D)  was  the  most  influential  factor  in determining  the  minimum
required sample size, followed by the dimensionality of the model (l), and then the number of extracted features (m).
Additionally, the minimum required sample size in terms of the number of pairs (nr) decreases as the discriminative
power of selected features (D) or dimensionality of the model (l) increases. In contrast, the minimum required sample
size increases as the number of extracted features (m) increases.

This last observation may seem to contradict the robustness of the distribution of the null hypothesis regarding
the number of extracted features (Figure 6(B) and Table 2) and warrants further explanation. The minimum required
sample size depends on the distributions of both null and alternative hypotheses. The distribution of the null hypothesis
of nested k-fold cross-validation is relatively invariant to the number of extracted features (similar value of  α for a
fixed threshold). However, as more features get extracted (a larger m), the distribution of the alternative hypothesis
changes and gets more overlapped with that of the null hypothesis (β increases). Therefore, the required sample size
needs to be increased to reduce the value of β and attain similar statistical power.

Lastly, an example is provided to show how Equations 4–7 can be used to estimate the required sample size
during  the  experimental  design.  Let’s  consider  the  example  presented  in  “COMPARING  CROSS-VALIDATION
METHODS IN A REAL-WORLD CLINICAL EXAMPLE” section, where we know we want to extract 48 features
prior to the execution of the study. Prior studies have reported the effect sizes in the range of 0.43–0.88 for such a
problem (Van Stan et al., 2020). Plugging D0 = 0.66 (as an average expected effect size),  m0 = 48, and l0 = 2 into
Equations 4–7, we get nr = 89.3, meaning that we need to recruit a minimum of 90 pairs of participants to have the
adequate power to run the analysis.

Q4: What is the recommended sample size for achieving a target statistical confidence of the final ML model?
The second part of Experiment 3 provided an answer to Q4 for nested 10-fold cross-validation. While we were
not able to derive a closed-form formula for this case, different tables and MATLAB code are provided that can be
used  for  linear  interpolation  and  estimation  of  the  recommended  sample  size  for  target  values  of  D  and  m.  It  is
noteworthy that using Tables A1 and A2 for estimating the recommended number of pairs (n) will result in a larger
value  compared  to  Equations  4–7.  For  example,  we  only need  89  pairs  for  D = 0.6,  m = 20,  and  l = 2  to  obtain  a
statistically significant effect (α = 0.05, 1−β = 0.8). However, 89 pairs with the same parameters will provide 50%
confidence in the model. To achieve model confidence of 80% and 95%, respectively, the sample size needs to be
increased to 169 and 247 pairs. This wide gap is because Equations 4–7 estimate the required n for just having the
statistical power to detect a significant effect. Whereas, having a model with high statistical confidence (a large 𝐶2,2)
is a more restrictive requirement than getting a statistically significant outcome and, therefore, requires more samples.
The  number  of  pairs  necessary  for  reaching  a  certain  confidence  in  the  model  increases  with  a  decrease  in  the
discriminative power of features (D) and with an increase in the number of extracted features (m). As a final note,
considering  the  negative  effect  of  the  high  number  of  extracted  features  on  the  statistical  power  and  statistical
confidence of the model, keeping the number of extracted features relatively low is preferable.

ML solutions often have different optimization processes. The focus of this study was to quantify the statistical
characteristics of different cross-validation methods in the presence of feature selection. However, other processes
including hyperparameter optimization and optimization of the architecture (e.g., in deep learning) are also important
and widely used in the ML community. While the specific findings (e.g., the method for estimating the required sample

size) of this study are limited to cases with feature selection, the general findings can be applied to other optimization
scenarios.  For  example,  single  holdout  or  train-validation-test  cross-validation  methods  should  not  be  used  for
hyperparameter optimization and optimization of the architecture of deep networks. Instead, the nested k-fold cross-
validation method should be employed. This argument is especially important for research with small sample sizes
(less than a few hundred).

Computing appropriate dimensionality of the feature space

The presented power analysis method (Equations 4–7) was derived to assist researchers with determining the
minimum sample size required during experimental design; however, the method can also be used for existing datasets.
Specifically, during experimental design, researchers know the features that they want to use so the dimensionality of
the feature space can be estimated, and their goal is to determine the required sample size. However, the  situation
reverses with existing datasets. That is, the sample size is already known, and the goal is to determine the appropriate
dimensionality  of  the  feature  space.  The  presented  method  can  also  be  used  to  estimate  the  maximum  allowable
dimensionality of the feature space. If the number of extracted features were higher than this estimated number, some
features  would  need  to  be  eliminated  such  that  the  dimensionality  of  the  feature  space  gets  below  the  maximum
allowable dimension. We would like to emphasize that this elimination should be carried out independently from the
labels of the dataset; otherwise, the elimination procedure will most likely overestimate the performance of the model
and will reduce the generalizability of the findings. Some examples of appropriate elimination would be using the
literature (generated from different datasets) for removing inferior features, computing correlation between features
of the dataset and only keeping one  among highly correlated features, or applying an unsupervised dimensionality
reduction without any optimization based on the labels of the dataset.

Lastly, an example is provided to show how Equations 4–7 can be used to estimate appropriate dimensionality
of  the  feature  space  for  an  existing  dataset.  Let’s  consider  the  example  presented  in  “COMPARING  CROSS-
VALIDATION METHODS IN A REAL-WORLD CLINICAL EXAMPLE” section, where our existing dataset has
136 pairs of participants. Plugging D0 = 0.66 (as an average expected effect size), m0 = 135, and l0 = 2 into Equations
4–7 we get nr = 135.2≈136, meaning that with 136 pairs of participants the maximum allowable dimensionality of the
feature space would be 135.

Limitations

Despite the importance of our current findings, several limitations should be mentioned. Our findings were based
on  Monte  Carlo  simulations,  and  we  had  to  make  certain  assumptions  to  keep  the  complexity  of  our  simulations
manageable. Those assumptions are responsible for most of the limitations of our findings. The first assumption was
that ML models were being used for a binary classification problem. Although the findings would still be valid for a
multi-class classification problem (e.g., that the single holdout method is the least reliable and nested k-fold cross-
validation is the most reliable method), the results of Experiment 3 could not be applied directly to other classification
problems and need to be simulated separately. The second assumption was that of a balanced dataset (equal number
of samples in both classes), which in practice may not be achievable or desirable. The third assumption was that all of
the  discriminative  features  each  had  equal  discriminative  power  represented  by  the  same  value  of  D.  The  fourth
assumption  was  that  all  discriminative  features  had  Gaussian  distributions,  and, hence, a  linear  classifier  (logistic
regression)  was  able  to  find  the  optimum decision boundary.  The  fifth  assumption  was  that  none of  the  extracted
features were correlated, and the remaining (m−l) features were irrelevant to the classification problem. While it is
desirable to extract only features that add novel information to the  model and are uncorrelated, in practice, this is
hardly ever achieved. Finally, it is important to note that the estimation of the minimum sample size of conventional
statistical tests (e.g., t-test, ANOVA, correlation, etc.) shares many of these assumptions and limitations, and, in that
regard, the methodology presented in Experiment 3 extends the application of widely used power analysis to include
ML models.

Generalizability of results to unbalanced datasets and other classification frameworks

As described in the Limitations section, the equations for the estimation of the required sample size were derived
based on simulated balanced datasets with underlying Gaussian distributions and with equal discriminative power for
selected features. This section includes modifications that would allow applications of power analysis to unbalanced
datasets and features with unequal discriminative powers. We will also present preliminary results on a direction that
could extend the application of the method to non-linear feature spaces.

First, unbalanced datasets were investigated.  Let 𝛾𝐷𝑏 denote the  ratio between the number of samples in the
positive (𝑛𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒) and negative classes (𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒). The following sets of parameters were used: 𝑚 = 20, 𝑙 = 2, 𝐷 ∈
[0.6, 0.8, 1], and 𝛾𝐷𝑏 ∈ [1.2, 1.4, 1.6, 1.8, 2]. Two different scenarios were tested. In the first scenario, Equations 4–7

𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒+𝑛𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒
2

were used for estimating the required sample size of the smaller class. The error was always negative, with MPE equal
to 44.2%. This indicates that using Equations 4–7 for estimating the required sample size of the smaller class leads to
a  significant overestimation.  In  the  second  scenario,  Equations  4–7  were  used for  estimating  an  adjusted  required
sample size, where the adjusted required sample size was defined as the average of the sample sizes of the positive
).  The  error  was  reduced,  with  MPE  equal  to  12.4%.  Further  investigation
and  negative  classes  (
indicated that, as the value of D increases, estimation of the adjusted required sample size becomes more robust to
higher imbalance ratios (𝛾𝐷𝑏). For example, if D = 0.6 and 𝛾𝐷𝑏 = 2, MPE for the adjusted required sample size was
70.6%; however, for D = 0.8 and 𝛾𝐷𝑏 = 2, MPE was reduced to 16%. Therefore, Equations 4–7 are relatively robust
to  moderately  imbalanced  datasets  when  employing  the  adjusted  required  sample  size  and  if  features  are  highly
discriminative (D ≥ 0.8). The figures for this analysis are provided in Figure A1 in the Appendix. In summary, the
“Compute_RequiredSampleSize.m”  code  provided  along  this  manuscript  can  be  used  for  unbalanced  datasets,
however, the estimated required sample size would be the average of the number of negative and positive samples.
Estimation of the sample size of each class from the estimated average required sample size and 𝛾𝐷𝑏 should be trivial.
Second, a limited number of cases with features with unequal  effect sizes (D) were simulated. To that end, a
series of 20-dimensional feature spaces (𝑚 = 20) containing two discriminative features (𝑙 = 2) were generated. The
discriminatory power of the first feature was taken from the set 𝐷 ∈ [0.6, 0.8, 1], and the discriminatory power of the
second feature was set equal to 𝛾𝐷 × 𝐷. The parameter 𝛾𝐷 captures the unequal discriminatory power between the two
features, and 𝛾𝐷 ∈ [1.2, 1.4, 1.6, 1.8, 2]. The average discriminatory power of the two features (𝐷0 = 𝐷
) was
used in Equation 7. The value of MPE was 7.9%. Our further investigation indicated that, as the value of D increases,
estimation of the required sample size becomes more robust to higher imbalance ratios (𝛾𝐷). For example, if D = 0.6
and 𝛾𝐷 = 2, MPE was 23.1%. However, for D = 0.8 and 𝛾𝐷 = 2, MPE was reduced to 16.7%. Therefore, Equations
4–7 are relatively robust to features with different discriminatory powers if both  features are discriminative enough
(D ≥ 0.8).  The  figures  for  this  analysis  are  provided  in  Figure  A2  in  the  Appendix.  In  summary,  the
“Compute_RequiredSampleSize.m”  code  provided  along  this  manuscript  can  be  used  for  features  with  different
unequal discriminative powers, however, the average of their discriminative powers needs to be used.

(𝛾𝐷+1)
2

Finally, the possibility of applying the method to non-linear feature spaces and other classification algorithms
was investigated. The findings of this study were based on simulated datasets with underlying Gaussian distributions.
In that sense, quantification of their discriminative power using Cohen’s D and the application of logistic regression
were optimum selections. We would like to emphasize another rationale for parameterization of power analysis in
terms of Cohen's D, and then we will present a possible direction for the generalization of power analysis to features
with non-Gaussian distributions and non-linear classifiers. Researchers often use effect sizes reported in the literature
for  estimating  the  minimum  required  sample  size  during  the  design  of  a  study,  and,  currently,  the  application  of
Cohen's D is ubiquitous in clinical sciences (Fritz et al., 2012). Therefore, the selection of Cohen’s D was driven by
this important practical consideration.

We will now present a possible modification that could extend the application of the presented power analysis
to more general cases. However, an in-depth treatment of this topic is out of the scope of this paper and needs to be
pursued in an independent study. Our proposed solution is based on computing an “equivalent Cohen’s D” for such
general cases. The “equivalent Cohen’s D” for a non-linear feature space is the value of D that, if used to generate
Gaussian features (please refer to Equations 1 and 2), produces similar classification accuracy with logistic regression
as the problem under investigation. We will demonstrate this  approach with bull’s eye datasets with five different
noise levels of [2, 2.5, 3, 3.5, 4]. Different noise levels model different amounts of overlap between the two classes.
Specifically, for a noise level of 0, the dataset will be two perfect co-centric circles with a between-class distance of
1 unit. The noise level of 2 corresponds to a uniform disturbance in the range of -1 to 1 (i.e., equal to the true between-
class distance). The noise level of 4 corresponds to a uniform disturbance with a range that is two times larger than
the true between-class distance. Figure A3 in the Appendix shows examples of this dataset with low and high noise
levels. A support vector machine (SVM) with a polynomial kernel was adopted for learning the decision boundary
between the two classes. For each noise level, the two dimensions of the bull’s eye dataset were augmented with 18
random features to create a 20-dimensional feature space (𝑚 = 20). Nested 10-fold cross-validation with polynomial
SVM was used to find the two most discriminative features. Following the methodology presented in the “Statistical
power and the required sample size” section (please refer to Figure 4), the true required sample size for rejecting the
null hypothesis was determined for each noise level. The equivalent Cohen’s D of each noise level was estimated from
a  look-up  table  that  we  generated  from  simulations  of  Gaussian  features  with  a  logistic  regression  classifier.  The
computed equivalent Cohen’s D was then used to estimate the required sample size from Equations 4–7. The results
showed an MPE of 8.6%, confirming the potential of this approach.

Directions for future studies

The study presented here can be extended in several directions. The first direction would be a rigorous and in-
depth treatment of extending the power analysis to non-linear feature spaces. Updating the power analysis method to
better account for unbalanced datasets and unequal discriminative power for selected features are other directions. The
current study showed that statistical properties of nested k-fold cross-validation are very desirable. However, only the
value of k = 10 was implemented. While the general findings of the study should hold for other values of k, we expect
an interaction effect among the power of the method, the sample size, and the value of k. A future study may suggest
the appropriate value of k for a given problem such that the statistical power of the model is maximized. The current
study used Cohen’s D for Gaussian features and proposed equivalent Cohen’s D for general feature spaces. However,
investigation of the most appropriate way to quantify and report the effect size in ML would allow practitioners and
researchers to use prior studies during experimental design and is a question for future research. A more theoretical
treatment  of  power  analysis  and  all  of  the  above-mentioned  directions  could  significantly  help  scientists  and
practitioners  with  the  appropriate  and  responsible  usage  of  ML.  Finally,  evaluating  the  effect  of  different  cross-
validation methods on the performance of ML using Bayes Error is another direction for future studies.

CONCLUSION

Monte Carlo simulations were adopted in this study to quantify the statistical characteristics of different cross-
validation  methods.  Our  analyses  showed  significantly  different  statistical  characteristics  among  different  cross-
validation methods. The model based on single hold-out had very low statistical power (meaning it required many
more samples to get a statistically significant outcome), very low statistical confidence (meaning it was very likely
for incorrect features to be selected), and very high bias (meaning it was very likely to overestimate the performance
of  the  model).  The  statistical  characteristics  of  the  popular  method  of  train-validation-test  were  also  very  poor.
Conversely, the model based on nested 10-fold cross-validation resulted in the highest statistical power and statistical
confidence. Also, the estimated performance was unbiased. Our numerical analyses showed that the required sample
size with a single holdout could be 50% higher than what would be needed if nested k-fold cross-validation were used.
Also, statistical confidence in the model based on nested k-fold cross-validation was as much as four times higher than
the statistical confidence in the single holdout-based model. Finally, computational models along with MATLAB code
were provided to assist in power analysis for designing future ML studies to determine the required and recommended
sample  sizes  when  employing  nested  10-fold  cross-validation.  Based  on  these  findings,  researchers  are  highly
encouraged to avoid using the single holdout and train-validation-test methods and use the unbiased and more robust
method of nested k-fold cross-validation. As a final note, if the ML processing pipeline does not include any model
selection component (e.g., feature selection, hyperparameter optimization, optimization of the architecture of a deep
or  shallow  neural  network,  selecting  between  different  classification  algorithms,  etc.),  k-fold  cross-validation  (no
nesting) may be used due to its lower computational complexity relative to nested k-fold cross-validation.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Research  reported  in  this  publication  was  supported  by  the  National  Institute  On  Deafness  And  Other
Communication  Disorders  of  the  National  Institutes  of  Health  under  Award  Numbers  (T32  DC013017,  P50
DC015446, K99 DC021235). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent
the  official  views  of  the  National  Institutes  of  Health.  The  authors  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  MGH  high-
performance computing resource that made the execution of our intensive simulations possible.

DISCLOSURE

Drs. Robert Hillman and Daryush Mehta have a financial interest in InnoVoyce LLC, a company focused on
developing and commercializing technologies for the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of voice-related disorders.
Dr. Hillman’s and Dr. Mehta’s interests were reviewed and are managed by Massachusetts General Hospital and Mass
General Brigham in accordance with their conflict-of-interest policies.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

Mass  General  Brigham  and  Mass  General  are  not  allowed  to  give  access  to  data  without  the  Principal
Investigator (PI) for the human studies protocol first submitting a protocol amendment to request permission to share
the  data  with  a  specific  collaborator on  a  case-by-case  basis.  This  policy  is  based  on  strict  rules  dealing  with  the
protection of patient data and information. Anyone wishing to request access to the data used for  comparing cross-
validation methods in a real-world clinical example section must contact Ms. Sarah DeRosa (anonymous@anonymous.org),
Program Coordinator for Research and Clinical Speech-Language Pathology, Center for Laryngeal Surgery and Voice
Rehabilitation, Massachusetts General Hospital.

The data used for Experiments 1–3 was generated using Monte Carlo simulations. Several MATLAB functions
associated  with  this  manuscript  are  available.  The  latest  version  of  the  code  can  be  retrieved  from
https://github.com/GhasemzadehHamzeh/ML_PowerAnalysis.

The “Compute_RequiredSampleSize.m” code takes the number of extracted features (m_0), the effect size of
the best features (D_0), and the number of selected features (l_0) as the input parameters and computes the required
number of pairs for having the statistical power for finding a statistically significant model (α = 0.05, 1−β = 0.8). This
code can also be used for unbalanced datasets; however, the estimated required sample size (𝑛𝑟) would be the average
of  the  number  of  negative  and  positive  samples.  The  sample  size  of  each  class  can  then  be  computed  using  the
estimated average required sample size and 𝛾𝐷𝑏. Specifically, the required sample size of the smaller class will be
. Similarly, this code can also be used
𝑛𝑟 ×
for features with different effect sizes; the average of the effect sizes needs to be input as D_0.

 and the required sample size of the larger class will be 𝑛𝑟 ×

2×𝛾𝐷𝑏
1+𝛾𝐷𝑏

2
1+𝛾𝐷𝑏

The “Compute_RecommendedSampleSize.m” code takes the number of extracted features (m_0), the effect size
of the best features (D_0), and the target value of 𝐶2,2 (CI_0) as the input parameters and computes the recommended
number of pairs for achieving the target value of 𝐶2,2.

The “Compute_NestedModelConfidence.m” code takes the number of extracted features (m_0), the effect size
of the best features (D_0), and the number of pairs in a dataset (n_0) as the input parameters and computes the value
of 𝐶2,2.

The “Feature_Selection” toolbox provides an implementation of forward feature selection with four investigated

cross-validation approaches. Please, refer to the “Main_Test.m” file for examples of the usage of the code.